
--- Page 1 ---

Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 2 ---

11080 – BIOLOGY
ISBN 81-7450-496-6
Textbook for Class XI
First Edition
February 2006 Phalguna 1927
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
Reprinted q No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
October 2006, November 2007, transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.
January 2009, January 2010,
q This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade, be lent, re-
January 2011, January 2012, sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in any form
of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.
December 2012, December 2013,
q The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised
December 2014, May 2016, price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect
and should be unacceptable.
March 2017, December 2017,
January 2019, September 2019,
February 2021, November 2021
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
Revised Edition DIVISION, NCERT
November 2022 Kartika 1944
NCERT Campus
Reprinted Sri Aurobindo Marg
New Delhi 110 016 Phone : 011-26562708
March 2024 Chaitra 1946
June 2024 Jyaistha 1946 108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
August 2024 Shravan 1946 Banashankari III Stage
Bangaluru 560 085 Phone : 080-26725740
December 2024 Agrahayana 1946
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014 Phone : 079-27541446
PD 150T GS
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
© National Council of Educational
Kolkata 700 114 Phone : 033-25530454
Research and Training, 2006, 2022
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021 Phone : 0361-2674869
Publication Team
Head, Publication : M.V. Srinivasan
Division
Chief Editor : Bijnan Sutar
` 185.00 Chief Production : Jahan Lal
Officer (In charge)
Chief Business : Amitabh Kumar
Manager
Assistant Editor : Shashi Chadha
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
Assistant Production : Sayuraj A.R.
watermark
Officer
Published at the Publication Division by the
Cover and Layout
Secretary, National Council of Educational
Shweta Rao
Research and Training, Sri Aurobindo Marg,
New Delhi 110 016 and printed at Pankaj Illustrations
Printing Press, D-28, Industrial Area, Lalit Maurya
Site-A, Mathura (Uttar Pradesh)
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 3 ---

F
OREWORD
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF) 2005, recommends that children’s life at
school must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks a departure
from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape our system and causes
a gap between the school, home and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed
on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic idea. They also attempt
to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp boundaries between different
subject areas. We hope these measures will take us significantly further in the direction
of a child-centred system of education outlined in the National Policy on
Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and teachers
will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and to pursue
imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise that, given space, time and
freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with the information passed
on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis of examination
is one of the key reasons why other resources and sites of learning are ignored.
Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat children as
participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of functioning.
Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in implementing the annual
calendar so that the required number of teaching days are actually devoted to teaching.
The methods used for teaching and evaluation will also determine how effective this
textbook proves for making children’s life at school a happy experience, rather than a
source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address the problem of
curricular burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different stages with
greater consideration for child psychology and the time available for teaching. The
textbook attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority and space to
opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in small groups, and
activities requiring hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) appreciates
the hard work done by the textbook development committee responsible for this book.
We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory group in science and mathematics,
Professor J.V. Narlikar and the Chief Advisor for this book, Professor K. Muralidhar,
Department of Zoology, University of Delhi, Delhi for guiding the work of this committee.
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 4 ---

Several teachers contributed to the development of this textbook. We are grateful to
their principals for making this possible. We are indebted to the institutions and
organisations which have generously permitted us to draw upon their resources,
material and personnel. We are especially grateful to the members of the National
Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary and Higher
Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development under the Chairpersonship of
Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable time and
contribution.
As an organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous improvement
in the quality of its products, NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which
will enable us to undertake further revision and refinement.
Director
New Delhi National Council of Educational
20 December 2005 Research and Training
(iv)
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 5 ---

R C T
ATIONALISATION OF ONTENT IN THE EXTBOOK
In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce content load on students. The
National Education Policy 2020, also emphasises reducing the content load and providing
opportunities for experiential learning with creative mindset. In this background, the NCERT
has undertaken the exercise to rationalise the textbooks across all classes. Learning Outcomes
already developed by the NCERT across classes have been taken into consideration in this
exercise.
Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of the following:
• Overlapping with similar content included in other subject areas in the same class
• Similar content included in the lower or higher class in the same subject
• Difficulty level
• Content, which is easily accessible to students without much interventions from teachers
and can be learned by children through self-learning or peer-learning
• Content, which is irrelevant in the present context
This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying out the changes given above.
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 6 ---

Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 7 ---

T D C
EXTBOOK EVELOPMENT OMMITTEE
CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY GROUP FOR TEXTBOOKS IN SCIENCE AND MATHEMATICS
J.V. Narlikar, Emeritus Professor, Chairman, Advisory Committee, Inter University Centre for
Astronomy and Astrophysics (IUCAA), Pune University, Pune
CHIEF ADVISOR
K. Muralidhar, Professor, Department of Zoology, University of Delhi, Delhi
MEMBERS
Ajit Kumar Kavathekar, Reader (Botany), Sri Venkateswara College, University of Delhi, Delhi
B.B.P. Gupta, Professor, Department of Zoology, North-Eastern Hill University, Shillong
C.V. Shimray, Lecturer, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT
Dinesh Kumar, Reader, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT
J.S. Gill, Professor, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT
K. Sarath Chandran, Reader (Zoology), Sri Venkateswara College, University of Delhi, Delhi
Nalini Nigam, Reader (Botany), Ramjas College, University of Delhi, Delhi
Pratima Gaur, Professor, Department of Zoology, University of Allahabad, Allahabad
Ratnam Kaul Wattal, Reader (Botany), Zakir Hussain College, University of Delhi, Delhi
R.K. Seth, UGC Scientist C, Department of Zoology, University of Delhi, Delhi
R.P. Singh, Lecturer (Biology), Rajkiya Pratibha Vikas Vidyalaya, Kishan Ganj, Delhi
Sangeeta Sharma, PGT (Biology), Kendriya Vidyalaya, JNU, New Delhi
Savithri Singh, Principal, Acharya Narendra Dev College, University of Delhi; Former Fellow, Centre
for Science Education and Communication, University of Delhi, Delhi
S.C. Jain, Professor, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT
Sunaina Sharma, Lecturer (Biology), Rajkiya Pratibha Vikas Vidyalaya, Dwarka, New Delhi
Tejinder Chawla, PGT (Biology), Guru Harkrishan Public School, Vasant Vihar, New Delhi
T.N. Lakhanpal, Professor (Retd.), Department of Bio Sciences, Himachal Pradesh University, Shimla
U.K. Nanda, Professor, Regional Institute of Education, Bhubaneshwar
MEMBER-COORDINATOR
B.K. Tripathi, Reader, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT.
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 8 ---

A
CKNOWLEDGEMENTS
National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) gratefully acknowledges
the contribution of the individuals and organisations involved in the development of the
Biology textbook for Class XI. The Council is grateful to Arvind Gupte, Principal (Retd.),
Government Collegiate Education Services, Madhya Pradesh; Shailaja Hittalmani,
Associate Professor (Genetics), University of Agricultural Sciences, Bangalore;
K.R. Shivanna, Professor (Retd.), Department of Botany, University of Delhi, Delhi; R.S.
Bedwal, Professor, Department of Zoology, University of Rajasthan, Jaipur; P.S.
Srivastava, Professor, Department of Biotechnology, Hamdard University, New Delhi and
Pramila Shivanna, former Teacher, D.A.V. School, Delhi, for their valuable suggestions.
The Council is also thankful to V.K. Bhasin, Professor and Head, Department of Zoology,
University of Delhi, Delhi; P.P. Bakre, Professor and Head, Department of Zoology,
University of Rajasthan, Jaipur and Savithri Singh, Principal, Acharya Narendra Dev
College, New Delhi for their support. The Council is also grateful to B.K. Gupta, Scientist,
Central Zoo Authority, New Delhi for providing pictures of zoological parks and
Sameer Singh for the pictures on the front and back cover. All the other photographs
used in the book provided by Savithri Singh and taken at either at NCERT, IARI Campus
or Acharya Narendra Dev College is gratefully acknowledged.
NCERT sincerely acknowledges the contributions of the members who participated in
the review of the manuscripts – M.K. Tiwari, PGT (Biology), Kendriya Vidyalaya, Mandsaur,
Madhya Pradesh; Maria Gracias Fernandes, PGT (Biology), G.V.M.S. Higher Secondary,
Ponda, Goa; A.K. Ganguly, PGT (Biology), Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya, Roshnabad,
Haridwar; Shivani Goswami, PGT (Biology), The Mother’s International School, New Delhi
and B.N. Pandey, Principal, Ordinance Factory Sr. Sec. School, Dehradun.
The Council is highly thankful to M. Chandra, Professor and Head, DESM; Hukum
Singh, Professor, DESM, NCERT for their valuable support throughout the making of
this book. The contributions of V.V. Anand, Professor (Retd), Regional Institute of
Education (RIE), Mysuru; A.K. Mohapatra, Professor, RIE, Bhubaneswar; Abhay Kumar,
Assistant Professor, CIET, NCERT; G.V. Gopal, Professor, RIE, Mysuru; Ishwant Kaur,
AHM, DMS, Ajmer; Sunita Farkya, Professor, DESM, NCERT; Pushplata Verma, Assistant
Professor, DESM, NCERT; C. Padmaja, Professor, RIE, Mysuru and Jaydeep Mandal,
Professor, RIE, Bhopal in the review of this textbook in 2017-18 are acknowledged.
The Council also gratefully acknowledges the contribution of Deepak Kapoor,
Incharge, Computer Station; Mohd. Khalid Raza and Arvind Sharma, DTP operators;
Saswati Banerjee and Hari Darshan Lodhi, Copy Editor; Archana Srivastava, Proof
Reader and APC office and administrative staff of DESM, NCERT.
The efforts of the Publication Department, NCERT in bringing out this publication
are also appreciated.
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 9 ---

A N T S
OTE FOR THE EACHERS AND TUDENTS
Biology is the science of life. It is the story of life on earth. It is the science of life forms and
living processes. Biological systems, often appear to challenge physical laws that govern the
behaviour of matter and energy in our world. Historically, biological knowledge was ancillary
to knowledge of human body and its function. The latter as we know, is the basis of medical
practice. However, parts of biological knowledge developed independent of human application.
Fundamental questions about origin of life, the origin and growth of biodiversity, the evolution
of flora and fauna of different habitats, etc., caught the imagination of biologists.
The very description of living organisms, be it from morphological perspective, physiological
perspective, taxonomical perspective, etc., engaged scientists to such an extent that for sheer
convenience, if not for anything else, the subject matter got artificially divided into the sub-
disciplines of botany and zoology and later into even microbiology. Meanwhile, physical sciences
made heavy inroads into biology, and established biochemistry and biophysics as new sub-
disciplines of biology. Mendel’s work and its rediscovery in the early twentieth century led to
the promotion of study of genetics. The discovery of the double-helical structure of DNA and
the deciphering of three dimensional structures of many macromolecules led to the
establishment of and phenomenal growth in the dominating area of molecular biology. In a
sense, functional disciplines laying emphasis on mechanisms underlying living processes,
received more attention, support, intellectual and social recognition. Biology, unfortunately,
got divided into classical and modern biology. To the majority of practising biologists, pursuit
of biological research became more empirical rather than a curiosity and hypothesis driven
intellectual exercise as is the case with theoretical physics, experimental physics, structural
chemistry and material science. Fortunately and quietly, general unifying principles of biology
were also being discovered, rediscovered and emphasised. The work of Mayr, Dobhzhansky,
Haldane, Perutz, Khorana, Morgan, Darlington, Fisher and many others brought respect and
seriousness to both classical and molecular biological disciplines. Ecology and Systems biology
got established as unifying biological disciplines. Every area of biology began developing
interface with not only other areas of biology but also other disciplines of science and
mathematics. Pretty soon, the boundaries became porous. They are now on the verge of
disappearing altogether. Progress in human biology, biomedical sciences, especially the
structure, functioning and evolution of human brain brought in respect, awe and philosophical
insights to biology. Biology even stepped out of laboratories, museums and natural parks and
raised social, economic and cultural issues capturing the imagination of general public and
hence political attention. Educationists did not lag behind and realised that biology should be
taught as an interdisciplinary and integrating science at all stages of educational training
especially at school and undergraduate levels. A new synthesis of all areas of basic and
applied areas of biology is the need of the hour. Biology has come of age. It has an independent
set of concepts which are universal just like physics and chemistry and mathematics.
The present volume is the first time presentation of the integrated biology for the school
level children. One of the lacunae in biology teaching and study is the absence of integration
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 10 ---

with other disciplinary knowledge of physics, chemistry etc. Further many processes in plants,
animals and microbes are similar when looked from physico-chemical perspective. Cell biology
has brought out the unifying common cellular level activities underlying apparently diverse
phenomena across plants, animals and microbes. Similarly, molecular science (e.g.
biochemistry or molecular biology) has revealed the similar molecular mechanisms in all
these apparently diverse organisms like plants, animals and microbes. Phenomena like
respiration, metabolism, energy utlisation, growth, reproduction and development can be
discussed in a unifying manner rather than as separate unrelated processes in plants and
animals. An attempt has been made to unify such diverse disciplines in the book. The
integration achieved however, is partial and not complete. Hopefully along with changes in
the teaching and learning context, to be brought out in the next few years, the next edition of
this book will reveal more integration of botany, zoology and microbiology and truly reflect the
true nature of biology – the future science of man by man and for man.
This new textbook of Biology for class XI is a completely rewritten book in view of the
syllabus revision and restructuring. It is also in accordance with the spirit of the National
Curriculum Framework (2005) guidelines. The subject matter is presented under twenty-two
chapters which are grouped under five thematic units. Each unit has a brief write up preceding
the unit highlighting the essence of the chapters to follow under that unit. Each unit also has
a biographical sketch of a prominent scientist in that area. Each chapter has, on the first
page, a detailed table of contents giving sub-headings within the chapter. Decimal system
using arabic numerals has been employed to indicate these sub-headings. At the end of each
chapter a brief summary is provided. This brings to the notice of the student, what she/he is
supposed to have learnt by studying the chapter. A set of questions is also provided at the
conclusion of each chapter. These questions are essentially to enable the student to test
herself/himself as to how much she/he has understood the subject matter. There are questions
which are purely of information recall type; there are questions which need analytical thinking
to answer and hence test true understanding; there are questions which are problems to
solve and finally there are questions which need analysis and speculation as there is no one
to answer to such questions. This tests the critical understanding of the subject matter in the
mind of the student.
Special emphasis has been given on the narrative style, illustrations, activity exercises,
clarity of expression, coverage of topics within the available time in school. A large number of
extremely talented and dedicated people including practising teachers helped in bringing out
this beautiful book. Our main purpose was to make sure that school level biology is not a
burden for students and teachers. We sincerely wish that teaching biology and learning biology
would become an enjoyable activity.
PROFESSOR K. Muralidhar
Department of Zoology
University of Delhi
(x)
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 11 ---

C
ONTENTS
FOREWORD iii
RATIONALISATION OF CONTENT IN THE TEXTBOOK V
A NOTE FOR THE TEACHERS AND STUDENTS ix
U I
NIT
DIVERSITY IN THE LIVING WORLD 1-54
Chapter 1 : The Living World 3
Chapter 2 : Biological Classification 10
Chapter 3 : Plant Kingdom 23
Chapter 4 : Animal Kingdom 37
U II
NIT
STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN PLANTS AND ANIMALS 55-84
Chapter 5 :Morphology of Flowering Plants 57
Chapter 6 :Anatomy of Flowering Plants 71
Chapter 7 :Structural Organisation in Animals 79
U III
NIT
CELL : STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONS 85-130
Chapter 8 : Cell : The Unit of Life 87
Chapter 9 : Biomolecules 104
Chapter 10 : Cell Cycle and Cell Division 120
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 12 ---

U IV
NIT
PLANT PHYSIOLOGY 131-180
Chapter 11 : Photosynthesis in Higher Plants 133
Chapter 12 : Respiration in Plants 153
Chapter 13 : Plant Growth and Development 166
U V
NIT
HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY 181-250
Chapter 14 : Breathing and Exchange of Gases 183
Chapter 15 : Body Fluids and Circulation 193
Chapter 16 : Excretory Products and their Elimination 205
Chapter 17 : Locomotion and Movement 217
Chapter 18 : Neural Control and Coordination 230
Chapter 19 : Chemical Coordination and Integration 239
Reprint 2025-26