
--- Page 1 ---

77
UUUUUnnnnniiiiittttt
AAAAAAAAAAllllllllllccccccccccoooooooooohhhhhhhhhhoooooooooollllllllllssssssssss,,,,,,,,,, PPPPPPPPPPhhhhhhhhhheeeeeeeeeennnnnnnnnnoooooooooollllllllllssssssssss
Objectives
After studying this Unit, you will be
aaaaaaaaaannnnnnnnnndddddddddd EEEEEEEEEEtttttttttthhhhhhhhhheeeeeeeeeerrrrrrrrrrssssssssss
able to
• name alcohols, phenols and
ethers according to the IUPAC
system of nomenclature;
Alcohols, phenols and ethers are the basic compounds for the
• discuss the reactions involved in
formation of detergents, antiseptics and fragrances, respectively.
the preparation of alcohols from
alkenes, aldehydes, ketones and
carboxylic acids; You have learnt that substitution of one or more
• discuss the reactions involved in hydrogen atom(s) from a hydrocarbon by another atom
the preparation of phenols from or a group of atoms result in the formation of an entirely
haloarenes, benzene sulphonic new compound having altogether different properties
acids, diazonium salts and
and applications. Alcohols and phenols are formed
cumene;
when a hydrogen atom in a hydrocarbon, aliphatic and
• discuss the reactions for
aromatic respectively, is replaced by –OH group. These
preparation of ethers from
classes of compounds find wide applications in industry
(i) alcohols and (ii) alkyl halides
as well as in day-to-day life. For instance, have you
and sodium alkoxides/aryloxides;
ever noticed that ordinary spirit used for polishing
• correlate physical properties of
wooden furniture is chiefly a compound containing
alcohols, phenols and ethers with
hydroxyl group, ethanol. The sugar we eat, the cotton
their structures;
used for fabrics, the paper we use for writing, are all
• discuss chemical reactions of the
three classes of compounds on made up of compounds containing –OH groups. Just
the basis of their functional think of life without paper; no note-books, books, news-
groups. papers, currency notes, cheques, certificates, etc. The
magazines carrying beautiful photographs and
interesting stories would disappear from our life. It
would have been really a different world.
An alcohol contains one or more hydroxyl (OH)
group(s) directly attached to carbon atom(s), of an
aliphatic system (CH OH) while a phenol contains –OH
3
group(s) directly attached to carbon atom(s) of an
aromatic system (C H OH).
6 5
The substitution of a hydrogen atom in a
hydrocarbon by an alkoxy or aryloxy group
(R–O/Ar–O) yields another class of compounds known
as ‘ethers’, for example, CH OCH (dimethyl ether). You
3 3
may also visualise ethers as compounds formed by
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 2 ---

substituting the hydrogen atom of hydroxyl group of an alcohol or
phenol by an alkyl or aryl group.
In this unit, we shall discuss the chemistry of three classes of
compounds, namely — alcohols, phenols and ethers.
77777.....11111 CCCCClllllaaaaassssssssssiiiiifffffiiiiicccccaaaaatttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
The classification of compounds makes their study systematic and
hence simpler. Therefore, let us first learn how are alcohols, phenols
and ethers classified?
7.1.1 Alcohols— Alcohols and phenols may be classified as mono–, di–, tri- or
Mono, Di, polyhydric compounds depending on whether they contain one, two,
Tri or three or many hydroxyl groups respectively in their structures as
Polyhydric given below:
alcohols
Monohydric Dihydric Trihydric
Monohydric alcohols may be further classified according to the
hybridisation of the carbon atom to which the hydroxyl group is
attached.
(i) Compounds containing C OHbond: In this class of alcohols,
sp3
the –OH group is attached to an sp3 hybridised carbon atom of an
alkyl group. They are further classified as follows:
Primary, secondary and tertiary alcohols: In these three types of
alcohols, the –OH group is attached to primary, secondary and
tertiary carbon atom, respectively as depicted below:
Allylic alcohols: In these alcohols, the —OH group is attached to
a sp3 hybridised carbon adjacent to the carbon-carbon double
bond, that is to an allylic carbon. For example
Benzylic alcohols: In these alcohols, the —OH group is attached
to a sp3—hybridised carbon atom next to an aromatic ring. For
example.
Chemistry 194
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 3 ---

Allylic and benzylic alcohols may be primary, secondary or tertiary.
(ii) Compounds containing C OH bond: These alcohols contain
sp2
—OH group bonded to a carbon-carbon double bond, i.e., to a
vinylic carbon or to an aryl carbon. These alcohols are also known
as vinylic alcohols.
Vinylic alcohol: CH = CH – OH
2
7.1.2 Phenols—
Mono, Di
and
trihydric
phenols
Monohydric
7.1.3 Ethers Ethers are classified as simple or symmetrical, if the alkyl or aryl
groups attached to the oxygen atom are the same, and mixed or
unsymmetrical, if the two groups are different. Diethyl ether,
C H OC H , is a symmetrical ether whereas C H OCH and C H OC H
2 5 2 5 2 5 3 2 5 6 5
are unsymmetrical ethers.
IIIIInnnnnttttteeeeexxxxxttttt QQQQQuuuuueeeeessssstttttiiiiiooooonnnnnsssss
7.1 Classify the following as primary, secondary and tertiary alcohols:
CH
3
(i) CH C CH OH (ii) H C CH CH OH
3 2 2 2
CH
3 OH
CH CH
3
(iii) CH CH CH OH (iv)
3 2 2
CH
3
CH CH C OH
CH CH CH
(v) 2 3 (vi) CH
OH 3
7.2 Identify allylic alcohols in the above examples.
77777.....22222 NNNNNooooommmmmeeeeennnnnccccclllllaaaaatttttuuuuurrrrreeeee (a) Alcohols: The common name of an alcohol is derived from the
common name of the alkyl group and adding the word alcohol to it.
For example, CH OH is methyl alcohol.
3
195 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 4 ---

According to IUPAC system, the name of an alcohol is derived from the
name of the alkane from which the alcohol is derived, by substituting ‘e’
of alkane with the suffix ‘ol’. The position of substituents are indicated
by numerals. For this, the longest carbon chain (parent chain) is
numbered starting at the end nearest to the hydroxyl group. The positions
of the –OH group and other substituents are indicated by using the
numbers of carbon atoms to which these are attached. For naming
polyhydric alcohols, the ‘e’ of alkane is retained and the ending ‘ol’ is
added. The number of –OH groups is indicated by adding the
multiplicative prefix, di, tri, etc., before ‘ol’. The positions of –OH groups
are indicated by appropriate locants, e.g., HO–CH –CH –OH is named as
2 2
ethane–1, 2-diol. Table 7.1 gives common and IUPAC names of a few
alcohols as examples.
Table 7.1: Common and IUPAC Names of Some Alcohols
Compound Common name IUPAC name
CH – OH Methyl alcohol Methanol
3
CH – CH – CH – OH n-Propyl alcohol Propan-1-ol
3 2 2
Isopropyl alcohol Propan-2-ol
CH – CH – CH – CH – OH n-Butyl alcohol Butan-1-ol
3 2 2 2
sec-Butyl alcohol Butan-2-ol
Isobutyl alcohol 2-Methylpropan-1-ol
tert-Butyl alcohol 2-Methylpropan-2-ol
HO–H C–CH –OH Ethylene glycol Ethane-1,2-diol
2 2
Glycerol Propane -1, 2, 3-triol
Cyclic alcohols are named using the prefix cyclo and considering
the —OH group attached to C–1.
OH
OH
CH
3
Cyclohexanol 2-Methylcyclopentanol
(b) Phenols: The simplest hydroxy derivative of benzene is phenol.
It is its common name and also an accepted IUPAC name. As structure
of phenol involves a benzene ring, in its substituted compounds the
terms ortho (1,2- disubstituted), meta (1,3-disubstituted) and para
(1,4-disubstituted) are often used in the common names.
Chemistry 196
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 5 ---

OH CH CH CH
3 3 3
OH
OH
OH
Common name Phenol o-Cresol m-Cresol p-Cresol
IUPAC name Phenol 2-Methylphenol 3-Methylphenol 4-Methylphenol
Dihydroxy derivatives of benzene are known as 1, 2-, 1, 3- and
1, 4-benzenediol.
OH OH OH
OH
OH
OH
Common name Catechol Resorcinol Hydroquinone or quinol
IUPAC name Benzene-1,2-diol Benzene-1,3-diol Benzene-1,4-diol
(c) Ethers: Common names of ethers are derived from the names of alkyl/
aryl groups written as separate words in alphabetical order and adding the
word ‘ether’ at the end. For example, CH OC H is ethylmethyl ether.
3 2 5
Table 7.2: Common and IUPAC Names of Some Ethers
Compound Common name IUPAC name
CH OCH Dimethyl ether Methoxymethane
3 3
C H OC H Diethyl ether Ethoxyethane
2 5 2 5
CH OCH CH CH Methyl n-propyl ether 1-Methoxypropane
3 2 2 3
C H OCH Methyl phenyl ether Methoxybenzene
6 5 3
(Anisole) (Anisole)
C H OCH CH Ethyl phenyl ether Ethoxybenzene
6 5 2 3
(Phenetole)
C H O(CH ) – CH Heptyl phenyl ether 1-Phenoxyheptane
6 5 2 6 3
CHO CH CH Methyl isopropyl ether 2-Methoxypropane
3 3
CH
3
Phenyl isopentyl ether 3- Methylbutoxybenzene
CH – O – CH – CH – OCH — 1,2-Dimethoxyethane
3 2 2 3
— 2-Ethoxy-
-1,1-dimethylcyclohexane
197 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 6 ---

If both the alkyl groups are the same, the prefix ‘di’ is added before the alkyl
group. For example, C H OC H is diethyl ether.
2 5 2 5
According to IUPAC system of nomenclature, ethers are regarded as
hydrocarbon derivatives in which a hydrogen atom is replaced by an
–OR or –OAr group, where R and Ar represent alkyl and aryl groups,
respectively. The larger (R) group is chosen as the parent hydrocarbon.
The names of a few ethers are given as examples in Table 7.2.
EEEEExxxxxaaaaammmmmpppppllllleeeee 77777.....11111 Give IUPAC names of the following compounds:
(i()i) CH CH CH CH CH OH (i(ii)i) CH CH O CH CH
3 2 3 2 3
Cl CH CH CH
3 3 3
OH NO
2
(iii) H 3 C CH 3 (iv) OC 2 H 5
SSSSSooooollllluuuuutttttiiiiiooooonnnnn (i) 4-Chloro-2,3-dimethylpentan-1-ol (ii)2-Ethoxypropane
(iii)2,6-Dimethylphenol (iv)1-Ethoxy-2-nitrocyclohexane
IIIIInnnnnttttteeeeexxxxxttttt QQQQQuuuuueeeeessssstttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
7.3 Name the following compounds according to IUPAC system.
(i) (ii)
(iii) (iv) (v)
77777.....33333 SSSSStttttrrrrruuuuuccccctttttuuuuurrrrreeeeesssss ooooofffff In alcohols, the oxygen of the –OH group is attached to carbon by a
FFFFFuuuuunnnnnccccctttttiiiiiooooonnnnnaaaaalllll sigma (s ) bond formed by the overlap of a sp3 hybridised orbital of
carbon with a sp3 hybridised orbital of oxygen. Fig. 7.1 depicts
GGGGGrrrrrooooouuuuupppppsssss
structural aspects of methanol, phenol and methoxymethane.
Fig. 7.1: Structures of methanol, phenol and methoxymethane
Chemistry 198
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 7 ---

The bond angle in alcohols is slightly less than the tetrahedral
angle (109°-28¢). It is due to the repulsion between the unshared
electron pairs of oxygen. In phenols, the –OH group is attached to sp2
hybridised carbon of an aromatic ring. The carbon– oxygen bond
length (136 pm) in phenol is slightly less than that in methanol. This
is due to (i) partial double bond character on account of the conjugation
of unshared electron pair of oxygen with the aromatic ring
(Section 7.4.4) and (ii) sp2 hybridised state of carbon to which oxygen
is attached.
In ethers, the four electron pairs, i.e., the two bond pairs and two
lone pairs of electrons on oxygen are arranged approximately in a
tetrahedral arrangement. The bond angle is slightly greater than the
tetrahedral angle due to the repulsive interaction between the two
bulky (–R) groups. The C–O bond length (141 pm) is almost the same
as in alcohols.
77777.....44444 AAAAAlllllcccccooooohhhhhooooolllllsssss aaaaannnnnddddd 7.4.1 Preparation of Alcohols
PPPPPhhhhheeeeennnnnooooolllllsssss Alcohols are prepared by the following methods:
1. From alkenes
(i) By acid catalysed hydration: Alkenes react with water in the
presence of acid as catalyst to form alcohols. In case of
unsymmetrical alkenes, the addition reaction takes place in
accordance with Markovnikov’s rule.
Mechanism
The mechanism of the reaction involves the following three steps:
Step 1: Protonation of alkene to form carbocation by electrophilic
attack of H O+.
3
H O + H+ fi H O+
2 3
Step 2: Nucleophilic attack of water on carbocation.
Step 3: Deprotonation to form an alcohol.
199 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 8 ---

Hydroboration - (ii) By hydroboration–oxidation: Diborane (BH ) reacts with alkenes
3 2
oxidation was first to give trialkyl boranes as addition product. This is oxidised to
reported by H.C.
alcohol by hydrogen peroxide in the presence of aqueous sodium
Brown in 1959. For
hydroxide.
his studies on boron
containing organic
compounds, Brown
shared the 1979 Nobel
prize in Chemistry
with G. Wittig.
The addition of borane to the double bond takes place in such
a manner that the boron atom gets attached to the sp2 carbon
carrying greater number of hydrogen atoms. The alcohol so formed
looks as if it has been formed by the addition of water to the
alkene in a way opposite to the Markovnikov’s rule. In this reaction,
alcohol is obtained in excellent yield.
2. From carbonyl compounds
(i) By reduction of aldehydes and ketones: Aldehydes and ketones
are reduced to the corresponding alcohols by addition of
hydrogen in the presence of catalysts (catalytic hydrogenation).
The usual catalyst is a finely divided metal such as platinum,
palladium or nickel. It is also prepared by treating aldehydes
and ketones with sodium borohydride (NaBH ) or lithium
4
aluminium hydride (LiAlH ). Aldehydes yield primary alcohols
4
whereas ketones give secondary alcohols.
The numbers in front (ii) By reduction of carboxylic acids and esters: Carboxylic acids
of the reagents along are reduced to primary alcohols in excellent yields by lithium
the arrow indicate
aluminium hydride, a strong reducing agent.
that the second
reagent is added only (i) LiAlH
4
when the reaction RCOOH RCH OH
2
with first is complete. (ii) HO
2
However, LiAlH is an expensive reagent, and therefore, used
4
for preparing special chemicals only. Commercially, acids are
reduced to alcohols by converting them to the esters (Section
7.4.4), followed by their reduction using hydrogen in the
presence of catalyst (catalytic hydrogenation).
R'OH
H+
Chemistry 200
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 9 ---

3. From Grignard reagents
Alcohols are produced by the reaction of Grignard reagents (Unit 6,
Class XII) with aldehydes and ketones.
The first step of the reaction is the nucleophilic addition of Grignard
reagent to the carbonyl group to form an adduct. Hydrolysis of the
adduct yields an alcohol.
... (i)
...(ii)
The reaction of The overall reactions using different aldehydes and ketones are as
Grignard reagents follows:
with methanal
produces a primary
alcohol, with other
aldehydes, secondary
alcohols and with
ketones, tertiary
alcohols.
You will notice that the reaction produces a primary alcohol with
methanal, a secondary alcohol with other aldehydes and tertiary alcohol
with ketones.
Give the structures and IUPAC names of the products expected from EEEEExxxxxaaaaammmmmpppppllllleeeee 77777.....22222
the following reactions:
(a) Catalytic reduction of butanal.
(b) Hydration of propene in the presence of dilute sulphuric acid.
(c) Reaction of propanone with methylmagnesium bromide followed
by hydrolysis.
SSSSSooooollllluuuuutttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
(a) (b) (c)
7.4.2 Preparation Phenol, also known as carbolic acid, was first isolated in the early
of Phenols nineteenth century from coal tar. Nowadays, phenol is commercially
produced synthetically. In the laboratory, phenols are prepared from
benzene derivatives by any of the following methods:
201 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 10 ---

1. From haloarenes
Chlorobenzene is fused with NaOH at 623K and 320 atmospheric
pressure. Phenol is obtained by acidification of sodium phenoxide so
produced (Unit 6, Class XII).
2. From benzenesulphonic acid
Benzene is sulphonated with oleum and benzene sulphonic acid so
formed is converted to sodium phenoxide on heating with molten
sodium hydroxide. Acidification of the sodium salt gives phenol.
3. From diazonium salts
A diazonium salt is formed by treating an aromatic primary amine
with nitrous acid (NaNO + HCl) at 273-278 K. Diazonium salts are
2
hydrolysed to phenols by warming with water or by treating with
dilute acids (Unit 9, Class XII).
+ –
NH N Cl OH
2 2
NaNO2 H O
2 + N + HCl
2
+HCl Warm
Aniline Benzene diazonium
chloride
Most of the worldwide
4. From cumene
production of phenol is
from cumene. Phenol is manufactured from the hydrocarbon, cumene. Cumene
(isopropylbenzene) is oxidised in the presence of air to cumene
hydroperoxide. It is converted to phenol and acetone by treating it
with dilute acid. Acetone, a by-product of this reaction, is also
obtained in large quantities by this method.
Chemistry 202
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 11 ---

IIIIInnnnnttttteeeeexxxxxttttt QQQQQuuuuueeeeessssstttttiiiiiooooonnnnnsssss
7.4 Show how are the following alcohols prepared by the reaction of a suitable
Grignard reagent on methanal ?
7.5 Write structures of the products of the following reactions:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
7.4.3 Physical Alcohols and phenols consist of two parts, an alkyl/aryl group and a
Properties hydroxyl group. The properties of alcohols and phenols are chiefly due
to the hydroxyl group. The nature of alkyl and aryl groups simply
modify these properties.
Boiling Points
The boiling points of alcohols and phenols increase with increase in the
number of carbon atoms (increase in van der Waals forces). In alcohols,
the boiling points decrease with increase of branching in carbon chain
(because of decrease in van der Waals forces with decrease in surface
area).
The –OH group in alcohols and phenols is involved in intermolecular
hydrogen bonding as shown below:
It is interesting to note that boiling points of alcohols and phenols
are higher in comparison to other classes of compounds, namely
hydrocarbons, ethers, haloalkanes and haloarenes of comparable
molecular masses. For example, ethanol and propane have comparable
molecular masses but their boiling points differ widely. The boiling
point of methoxymethane is intermediate of the two boiling points.
203 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 12 ---

The high boiling points of alcohols are mainly due to the presence
of intermolecular hydrogen bonding in them which is lacking in ethers
and hydrocarbons.
Solubility
Solubility of alcohols and phenols in
water is due to their ability to form
hydrogen bonds with water molecules
as shown. The solubility decreases with
increase in size of alkyl/aryl (hydro-
phobic) groups. Several of the lower
molecular mass alcohols are miscible
with water in all proportions.
EEEEExxxxxaaaaammmmmpppppllllleeeee 77777.....33333 Arrange the following sets of compounds in order of their increasing
boiling points:
(a) Pentan-1-ol, butan-1-ol, butan-2-ol, ethanol, propan-1-ol, methanol.
(b) Pentan-1-ol, n-butane, pentanal, ethoxyethane.
SSSSSooooollllluuuuutttttiiiiiooooonnnnn (a) Methanol, ethanol, propan-1-ol, butan-2-ol, butan-1-ol, pentan-1-ol.
(b) n-Butane, ethoxyethane, pentanal and pentan-1-ol.
7.4.4 Chemical Alcohols are versatile compounds. They react both as nucleophiles and
Reactions electrophiles. The bond between O–H is broken when alcohols react as
nucleophiles.
Alcohols as nucleophiles (i)
(ii) The bond between C–O is broken when they react as
electrophiles. Protonated alcohols react in this manner.
Protonated alcohols as electrophiles
Based on the cleavage of O–H and C–O bonds, the reactions
of alcohols and phenols may be divided into two groups:
Chemistry 204
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 13 ---

(a) Reactions involving cleavage of O–H bond
1. Acidity of alcohols and phenols
(i) Reaction with metals: Alcohols and phenols react with active
metals such as sodium, potassium and aluminium to yield
corresponding alkoxides/phenoxides and hydrogen.
In addition to this, phenols react with aqueous sodium
hydroxide to form sodium phenoxides.
OH ONa
+ NaOH + H O
2
Sodium phenoxide
The above reactions show that alcohols and phenols are
acidic in nature. In fact, alcohols and phenols are Brönsted
acids i.e., they can donate a proton to a stronger base (B:).
(ii) Acidity of alcohols: The acidic character of alcohols is due to
the polar nature of O–H bond. An electron-releasing group
(–CH , –C H ) increases electron density on oxygen tending to
3 2 5
decrease the polarity of O-H bond. This decreases the acid
strength. For this reason, the acid strength of alcohols decreases
in the following order:
205 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 14 ---

Alcohols are, however, weaker acids than water. This can be
illustrated by the reaction of water with an alkoxide.
This reaction shows that water is a better proton donor (i.e.,
stronger acid) than alcohol. Also, in the above reaction, we note
that an alkoxide ion is a better proton acceptor than hydroxide
ion, which suggests that alkoxides are stronger bases (sodium
ethoxide is a stronger base than sodium hydroxide).
Alcohols act as Bronsted bases as well. It is due to the
presence of unshared electron pairs on oxygen, which makes
them proton acceptors.
(iii) Acidity of phenols: The reactions of phenol with metals (e.g.,
sodium, aluminium) and sodium hydroxide indicate its acidic
nature. The hydroxyl group, in phenol is directly attached to
the sp2 hybridised carbon of benzene ring which acts as an
electron withdrawing group. Due to this, the charge distribution
in phenol molecule, as depicted in its resonance structures,
causes the oxygen of –OH group to be positive.
The reaction of phenol with aqueous sodium hydroxide
indicates that phenols are stronger acids than alcohols and water.
Let us examine how a compound in which hydroxyl group
attached to an aromatic ring is more acidic than the one in
which hydroxyl group is attached to an alkyl group.
The ionisation of an alcohol and a phenol takes place as follows:
Due to the higher electronegativity of sp2 hybridised carbon
of phenol to which –OH is attached, electron density decreases
on oxygen. This increases the polarity of O–H bond and results
in an increase in ionisation of phenols than that of alcohols.
Now let us examine the stabilities of alkoxide and phenoxide
ions. In alkoxide ion, the negative charge is localised on oxygen
while in phenoxide ion, the charge is delocalised.
The delocalisation of negative charge (structures I-V) makes
Chemistry 206
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 15 ---

phenoxide ion more stable and favours the ionisation of phenol.
Although there is also charge delocalisation in phenol, its
resonance structures have charge separation due to which the
phenol molecule is less stable than phenoxide ion.
In substituted phenols, the presence of electron withdrawing
groups such as nitro group, enhances the acidic strength of
phenol. This effect is more pronounced when such a group is
present at ortho and para positions. It is due to the effective
delocalisation of negative charge in phenoxide ion when
substituent is at ortho or para position. On the other hand,
electron releasing groups, such as alkyl groups, in general, do
not favour the formation of phenoxide ion resulting in decrease
in acid strength. Cresols, for example, are less acidic than phenol.
The greater the pK a Table 7.3: pK Values of some Phenols and Ethanol
a
value, the weaker the
acid.
Compound Formula pK
a
o-Nitrophenol o–O N–C H –OH 7.2
2 6 4
m-Nitrophenol m–O N–C H –OH 8.3
2 6 4
p-Nitrophenol p-O N–C H –OH 7.1
2 6 4
Phenol C H –OH 10.0
6 5
o-Cresol o-CH –C H –OH 10.2
3 6 4
m-Cresol m-CH C H –OH 10.1
3 6 4
p-Cresol p-CH –C H –OH 10.2
3 6 4
Ethanol C H OH 15.9
2 5
From the above data, you will note that phenol is million times
more acidic than ethanol.
Arrange the following compounds in increasing order of their acid strength: EEEEExxxxxaaaaammmmmpppppllllleeeee 77777.....44444
Propan-1-ol, 2,4,6-trinitrophenol, 3-nitrophenol, 3,5-dinitrophenol,
phenol, 4-methylphenol.
Propan-1-ol, 4-methylphenol, phenol, 3-nitrophenol, 3,5-dinitrophenol, SSSSSooooollllluuuuutttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
2,4, 6-trinitrophenol.
2. Esterification
Alcohols and phenols react with carboxylic acids, acid chlorides and
acid anhydrides to form esters.
207 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 16 ---

Pyridine
R/ArOH+R’COCl R/ArOCOR’
+ HCl
The reaction with carboxylic acid and acid anhydride is carried
Aspirin possesses
out in the presence of a small amount of concentrated sulphuric
analgesic, anti-
acid. The reaction is reversible, and therefore, water is removed as
inflammatory and
soon as it is formed. The reaction with acid chloride is carried out in
antipyretic properties.
the presence of a base (pyridine) so as to neutralise HCl which is
formed during the reaction. It shifts the equilibrium to the right
hand side. The introduction of acetyl (CH CO) group in alcohols or
3
phenols is known as acetylation. Acetylation of salicylic acid
produces aspirin.
(b) Reactions involving cleavage of carbon–oxygen (C–O) bond in
alcohols
The reactions involving cleavage of C–O bond take place only in
alcohols. Phenols show this type of reaction only with zinc.
1. Reaction with hydrogen halides: Alcohols react with hydrogen
halides to form alkyl halides (Refer Unit 6, Class XII).
ROH + HX fi R–X + H O
2
The difference in reactivity of three classes of alcohols with HCl
distinguishes them from one another (Lucas test). Alcohols are soluble
in Lucas reagent (conc. HCl and ZnCl ) while their halides are immiscible
2
and produce turbidity in solution. In case of tertiary alcohols, turbidity
is produced immediately as they form the halides easily. Primary
alcohols do not produce turbidity at room temperature.
2. Reaction with phosphorus trihalides: Alcohols are converted to
alkyl bromides by reaction with phosphorus tribromide (Refer
Unit 6, Class XII).
3. Dehydration: Alcohols undergo dehydration (removal of a molecule
of water) to form alkenes on treating with a protic acid e.g.,
concentrated H SO or H PO , or catalysts such as anhydrous zinc
2 4 3 4
chloride or alumina.
Ethanol undergoes dehydration by heating it with concentrated
H SO at 443 K.
2 4
Chemistry 208
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 17 ---

Secondary and tertiary alcohols are dehydrated under milder
conditions. For example
Thus, the relative ease of dehydration of alcohols follows the
following order:
Tertiary > Secondary > Primary
The mechanism of dehydration of ethanol involves the following steps:
Tertiary carbocations Mechanism
are more stable and
Step 1: Formation of protonated alcohol.
therefore are easier to
form than secondary
and primary
carbocations; tertiary
alcohols are the easiest
to dehydrate.
Step 2: Formation of carbocation: It is the slowest step and hence, the
rate determining step of the reaction.
Step 3: Formation of ethene by elimination of a proton.
The acid used in step 1 is released in step 3. To drive the equilibrium
to the right, ethene is removed as it is formed.
4. Oxidation: Oxidation of alcohols involves the formation of a carbon-
oxygen double bond with cleavage of an O-H and C-H bonds.
Such a cleavage and formation of bonds occur in oxidation
reactions. These are also known as dehydrogenation reactions as
these involve loss of dihydrogen from an alcohol molecule. Depending
on the oxidising agent used, a primary alcohol is oxidised to an
aldehyde which in turn is oxidised to a carboxylic acid.
209 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 18 ---

Strong oxidising agents such as acidified potassium
permanganate are used for getting carboxylic acids from alcohols
directly. CrO in anhydrous medium is used as the oxidising agent
3
for the isolation of aldehydes.
CrO
RCH OH3RCHO
2
A better reagent for oxidation of primary alcohols to aldehydes in
good yield is pyridinium chlorochromate (PCC), a complex of
chromium trioxide with pyridine and HCl.
PCC
CH CH CHCH OHCH CH CHCHO
3 2 3
Secondary alcohols are oxidised to ketones by chromic anhyride
(CrO ).
3
Tertiary alcohols do not undergo oxidation reaction. Under strong
reaction conditions such as strong oxidising agents (KMnO ) and
4
elevated temperatures, cleavage of various C-C bonds takes place
and a mixture of carboxylic
acids containing lesser number
of carbon atoms is formed.
When the vapours of a
primary or a secondary alcohol
are passed over heated copper
at 573 K, dehydrogenation
takes place and an aldehyde or
a ketone is formed while tertiary
alcohols undergo dehydration.
Biological oxidation of methanol and ethanol in the body produces the corresponding
aldehyde followed by the acid. At times the alcoholics, by mistake, drink ethanol,
mixed with methanol also called denatured alcohol. In the body, methanol is oxidised
first to methanal and then to methanoic acid, which may cause blindness and
death. A methanol poisoned patient is treated by giving intravenous infusions of
diluted ethanol. The enzyme responsible for oxidation of aldehyde (HCHO) to acid
is swamped allowing time for kidneys to excrete methanol.
(c) Reactions of phenols
Following reactions are shown by phenols only.
Chemistry 210
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 19 ---

1. Electrophilic aromatic substitution
In phenols, the reactions that take place on the aromatic ring are
electrophilic substitution reactions (Unit 9, Class XI). The –OH group
attached to the benzene ring activates it towards electrophilic
substitution. Also, it directs the incoming group to ortho and para
positions in the ring as these positions become electron rich due to
the resonance effect caused by –OH group. The resonance structures
are shown under acidity of phenols.
Common electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions taking place
in phenol are as follows:
(i) Nitration: With dilute nitric acid at low temperature (298 K),
phenol yields a mixture of ortho and para nitrophenols.
The ortho and para isomers can be separated by steam
distillation. o-Nitrophenol is steam volatile due to intramolecular
hydrogen bonding while p-nitrophenol is less volatile due to
intermolecular hydrogen bonding which causes the association
of molecules.
2, 4, 6 - Trinitrophenol
is a strong acid due to
the presence of three
With concentrated nitric acid, phenol is converted to
electron withdrawing
2,4,6-trinitrophenol. The product is commonly known as picric
–NO groups which
2 acid. The yield of the reaction product is poor.
facilitate the release of
hydrogen ion.
Nowadays picric acid is prepared by treating phenol first
with concentrated sulphuric acid which converts it to
phenol-2,4-disulphonic acid, and then with concentrated nitric
acid to get 2,4,6-trinitrophenol. Can you write the equations of
the reactions involved?
211 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 20 ---

(ii) Halogenation: On treating phenol with bromine, different reaction
products are formed under different experimental conditions.
(a) When the reaction is carried out in solvents of low polarity
such as CHCl or CS and at low temperature,
3 2
monobromophenols are formed.
The usual halogenation of benzene takes place in the
presence of a Lewis acid, such as FeBr (Unit 6, Class XII),
3
which polarises the halogen molecule. In case of phenol, the
polarisation of bromine molecule takes place even in the
absence of Lewis acid. It is due to the highly activating
effect of –OH group attached to the benzene ring.
(b) When phenol is treated with bromine water,
2,4,6-tribromophenol is formed as white precipitate.
EEEEExxxxxaaaaammmmmpppppllllleeeee 77777.....55555 Write the structures of the major products expected from the following
reactions:
(a) Mononitration of 3-methylphenol
(b) Dinitration of 3-methylphenol
(c) Mononitration of phenyl methanoate.
SSSSSooooollllluuuuutttttiiiiiooooonnnnn The combined influence of –OH and –CH groups determine the
3
position of the incoming group.
2. Kolbe’s reaction
Phenoxide ion generated by treating phenol with sodium hydroxide
is even more reactive than phenol towards electrophilic aromatic
substitution. Hence, it undergoes electrophilic substitution with
carbon dioxide, a weak electrophile. Ortho hydroxybenzoic acid is
formed as the main reaction product.
Chemistry 212
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 21 ---

3. Reimer-Tiemann reaction
On treating phenol with chloroform in the presence of sodium
hydroxide, a –CHO group is introduced at ortho position of benzene
ring. This reaction is known as Reimer - Tiemann reaction.
The intermediate substituted benzal chloride is hydrolysed in the
presence of alkali to produce salicylaldehyde.
4. Reaction of phenol with zinc dust
Phenol is converted to benzene on heating with zinc dust.
5. Oxidation
Oxidation of phenol with chromic
acid produces a conjugated diketone
known as benzoquinone. In the
presence of air, phenols are slowly
oxidised to dark coloured mixtures
containing quinones.
IIIIInnnnnttttteeeeexxxxxttttt QQQQQuuuuueeeeessssstttttiiiiiooooonnnnnsssss
7.6 Give structures of the products you would expect when each of the
following alcohol reacts with (a) HCl –ZnCl (b) HBr and (c) SOCl .
2 2
(i) Butan-1-ol (ii) 2-Methylbutan-2-ol
7.7 Predict the major product of acid catalysed dehydration of
(i) 1-methylcyclohexanol and (ii) butan-1-ol
7.8 Ortho and para nitrophenols are more acidic than phenol. Draw the
resonance structures of the corresponding phenoxide ions.
7.9 Write the equations involved in the following reactions:
(i) Reimer - Tiemann reaction (ii) Kolbe’s reaction
213 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 22 ---

77777.....55555 SSSSSooooommmmmeeeee Methanol and ethanol are among the two commercially important
alcohols.
CCCCCooooommmmmmmmmmeeeeerrrrrccccciiiiiaaaaallllllllllyyyyy
1. Methanol
IIIIImmmmmpppppooooorrrrrtttttaaaaannnnnttttt
Methanol, CH OH, also known as ‘wood spirit’, was produced by
AAAAAlllllcccccooooohhhhhooooolllllsssss 3
destructive distillation of wood. Today, most of the methanol is
produced by catalytic hydrogenation of carbon monoxide at high
pressure and temperature and in the presence of ZnO – Cr O
2 3
catalyst.
Methanol is a colourless liquid and boils at 337 K. It is highly
poisonous in nature. Ingestion of even small quantities of methanol
can cause blindness and large quantities causes even death. Methanol
is used as a solvent in paints, varnishes and chiefly for making
formaldehyde.
2. Ethanol
Ethanol, C H OH, is obtained commercially by fermentation, the
2 5
oldest method is from sugars. The sugar in molasses, sugarcane
or fruits such as grapes is converted to glucose and fructose, (both
of which have the formula C H O ), in the presence of an enzyme,
6 12 6
invertase. Glucose and fructose undergo fermentation in the
presence of another enzyme, zymase, which is found in yeast.
In wine making, grapes are the source of sugars and yeast. As
Ingestion of ethanol acts grapes ripen, the quantity of sugar increases and yeast grows on the
on the central nervous outer skin. When grapes are crushed, sugar and the enzyme come in
system. In moderate contact and fermentation starts. Fermentation takes place in
amounts, it affects anaerobic conditions i.e. in absence of air. Carbon dioxide is released
judgment and lowers
during fermentation.
inhibitions. Higher
The action of zymase is inhibited once the percentage of alcohol
concentrations cause
formed exceeds 14 percent. If air gets into fermentation mixture, the
nausea and loss of
consciousness. Even at oxygen of air oxidises ethanol to ethanoic acid which in turn destroys
higher concentrations, the taste of alcoholic drinks.
it interferes with Ethanol is a colourless liquid with boiling point 351 K. It is used
spontaneous respiration
as a solvent in paint industry and in the preparation of a number of
and can be fatal.
carbon compounds. The commercial alcohol is made unfit for drinking
by mixing in it some copper sulphate (to give it a colour) and pyridine
(a foul smelling liquid). It is known as denaturation of alcohol.
Nowadays, large quantities of ethanol are obtained by hydration of
ethene (Section 7.4).
Chemistry 214
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 23 ---

77777.....66666 EEEEEttttthhhhheeeeerrrrrsssss
7.6.1 Preparation 1. By dehydration of alcohols
of Ethers
Alcohols undergo dehydration in the presence of protic acids
(H SO , H PO ). The formation of the reaction product, alkene or ether
2 4 3 4
depends on the reaction conditions. For example, ethanol is
dehydrated to ethene in the presence of sulphuric acid at 443 K.
At 413 K, ethoxyethane is the main product.
Diethyl ether has been
used widely as an
inhalation anaesthetic.
But due to its slow
effect and an
unpleasant recovery The formation of ether is a nucleophilic bimolecular reaction (S 2)
N
period, it has been involving the attack of alcohol molecule on a protonated alcohol, as
replaced, as an indicated below:
anaesthetic, by other
compounds.
Acidic dehydration of alcohols, to give an alkene is also associated
with substitution reaction to give an ether.
The method is suitable for the preparation of ethers having
primary alkyl groups only. The alkyl group should be unhindered
and the temperature be kept low. Otherwise the reaction favours the
formation of alkene. The reaction follows S 1 pathway when the alcohol
N
is secondary or tertiary about which you will learn in higher classes.
However, the dehydration of secondary and tertiary alcohols to give
corresponding ethers is unsuccessful as elimination competes over
substitution and as a consequence, alkenes are easily formed.
Can you explain why is bimolecular dehydration not appropriate
for the preparation of ethyl methyl ether?
2. Williamson synthesis
It is an important laboratory method for the preparation of
Alexander William
symmetrical and unsymmetrical ethers. In this method, an alkyl
Williamson (1824–1904)
halide is allowed to react with sodium alkoxide.
was born in London of
Scottish parents. In R–X+R’–O – N + a R–O–R’ + Na X
1849, he became
Professor of Chemistry Ethers containing substituted alkyl groups (secondary or tertiary)
at University College, may also be prepared by this method. The reaction involves S 2 attack
N
London. of an alkoxide ion on primary alkyl halide.
215 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 24 ---

ONa + CH –Br
3
Better results are obtained if the alkyl halide is primary. In case
of secondary and tertiary alkyl halides, elimination competes over
substitution. If a tertiary alkyl halide is used, an alkene is the only
reaction product and no ether is formed. For example, the reaction of
CH ONa with (CH ) C–Br gives exclusively 2-methylpropene.
3 3 3
It is because alkoxides are not only nucleophiles but strong bases
as well. They react with alkyl halides leading to elimination reactions.
EEEEExxxxxaaaaammmmmpppppllllleeeee 77777.....66666 The following is not an appropriate reaction for the preparation of
t-butyl ethyl ether.
(i) What would be the major product of this reaction ?
(ii) Write a suitable reaction for the preparation of t-butylethyl ether.
SSSSSooooollllluuuuutttttiiiiiooooonnnnn (i) The major product of the given reaction is 2-methylprop-1-ene.
It is because sodium ethoxide is a strong nucleophile as well as
a strong base. Thus elimination reaction predominates over
substitution.
(ii)
Phenols are also converted to ethers by this method. In this, phenol
is used as the phenoxide moiety.
Chemistry 216
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 25 ---

7.6.2 Physical The C-O bonds in ethers are polar and thus, ethers have a net dipole
Properties moment. The weak polarity of ethers do not appreciably affect their
boiling points which are comparable to those of the alkanes of
comparable molecular masses but are much lower than the boiling
points of alcohols as shown in the following cases:
Formula CH (CH ) CH C H -O-C H CH (CH ) -OH
3 23 3 2 5 2 5 3 23
n-Pentane Ethoxyethane Butan-1-ol
b.p./K 309.1 307.6 390
The large difference in boiling points of alcohols and ethers is due
to the presence of hydrogen bonding in alcohols.
The miscibility of ethers with water resembles those of alcohols of
the same molecular mass. Both ethoxyethane and butan-1-ol are
miscible to almost the same extent i.e., 7.5 and 9 g per 100 mL water,
respectively while pentane is essentially immiscible with water. Can
you explain this observation ? This is due to the fact that just like
alcohols, oxygen of ether can also form hydrogen bonds with water
molecule as shown:
1. Cleavage of C–O bond in ethers
7.6.3 Chemical
Reactions Ethers are the least reactive of the functional groups. The cleavage of
C-O bond in ethers takes place under drastic conditions with excess
of hydrogen halides. The reaction of dialkyl ether gives two alkyl
halide molecules.
Alkyl aryl ethers are cleaved at the alkyl-oxygen bond due to the
more stable aryl-oxygen bond. The reaction yields phenol and alkyl
halide.
Ethers with two different alkyl groups are also cleaved in the same
manner.
The order of reactivity of hydrogen halides is as follows:
HI > HBr > HCl. The cleavage of ethers takes place with concentrated
HI or HBr at high temperature.
217 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 26 ---

MMMMMeeeeeccccchhhhhaaaaannnnniiiiisssssmmmmm
The reaction of an ether with concentrated HI starts with protonation of ether molecule.
Step 1:
The reaction takes place with HBr or HI because these reagents are sufficiently acidic.
Step 2:
Iodide is a good nucleophile. It attacks the least substituted carbon of the oxonium
ion formed in step 1 and displaces an alcohol molecule by S2 mechanism.
N
Thus, in the cleavage of mixed ethers with two different alkyl groups, the alcohol
and alkyl iodide formed, depend on the nature of alkyl groups. When primary or
secondary alkyl groups are present, it is the lower alkyl group that forms alkyl
iodide (S 2 reaction).
N
When HI is in excess and the reaction is carried out at high temperature,
ethanol reacts with another molecule of HI and is converted to ethyl iodide.
Step 3:
However, when one of the alkyl group is a tertiary group, the halide
formed is a tertiary halide.
CH 3 CH 3
CH C O CH +HI CHOH+CH C I
3 3 3 3
CH CH
3 3
It is because in step 2 of the reaction, the departure of leaving group
(HO–CH ) creates a more stable carbocation [(CH ) C+], and the reaction
3 33
follows S 1 mechanism.
N
In case of anisole, methylphenyl
CH CH
3 3
+ slow + oxonium ion, is
CH C O CH CH C + CHOH
3 3 3 3
H
CH 3 CH 3 formed by protonation of ether. The
bond between O–CH is weaker
3
CH CH
3 3 than the bond between O–C H
6 5
CH C + + I– fast CH C I because the carbon of phenyl
3 3 group is sp2 hybridised and there
CH CH is a partial double bond character.
3 3
Chemistry 218
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 27 ---

Therefore the attack by I– ion breaks O–CH bond to form CH I. Phenols
3 3
do not react further to give halides because the sp2 hybridised carbon
of phenol cannot undergo nucleophilic substitution reaction needed
for conversion to the halide.
Give the major products that are formed by heating each of the following EEEEExxxxxaaaaammmmmpppppllllleeeee 77777.....77777
ethers with HI.
(i) (ii)
(iii)
(i) (ii) SSSSSooooollllluuuuutttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
(iii)
2. Electrophilic substitution
The alkoxy group (-OR) is ortho, para directing and activates the
aromatic ring towards electrophilic substitution in the same way as
in phenol.
(i) Halogenation: Phenylalkyl ethers undergo usual halogenation
in the benzene ring, e.g., anisole undergoes bromination with
bromine in ethanoic acid even in the absence of iron (III) bromide
catalyst. It is due to the activation of benzene ring by the methoxy
group. Para isomer is obtained in 90% yield.
219 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 28 ---

(ii) Friedel-Crafts reaction: Anisole undergoes Friedel-Crafts reaction,
i.e., the alkyl and acyl groups are introduced at ortho and para
positions by reaction with alkyl halide and acyl halide in the
presence of anhydrous aluminium chloride (a Lewis acid) as catalyst.
(iii) Nitration: Anisole reacts with a mixture of concentrated sulphuric
and nitric acids to yield a mixture of ortho and para nitroanisole.
IIIIInnnnnttttteeeeexxxxxttttt QQQQQuuuuueeeeessssstttttiiiiiooooonnnnnsssss
7.10 Write the reactions of Williamson synthesis of 2-ethoxy-3-methylpentane
starting from ethanol and 3-methylpentan-2-ol.
7.11 Which of the following is an appropriate set of reactants for the
preparation of 1-methoxy-4-nitrobenzene and why?
(i) (ii)
Chemistry 220
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 29 ---

7.12 Predict the products of the following reactions:
(i) CH - CH- CH- O – C+H HfiBr
3 2 2 3
(ii)
(iii)
(iv) ( CH ) C- OC (cid:190)H(cid:190) (cid:190) fi HI
3 3 2 5
SSSSSuuuuummmmmmmmmmaaaaarrrrryyyyy
Alcohols and phenols are classified (i) on the basis of the number of hydroxyl
groups and (ii) according to the hybridisation of the carbon atom, sp3 or sp2 to
which the –OH group is attached. Ethers are classified on the basis of groups
attached to the oxygen atom.
Alcohols may be prepared (1) by hydration of alkenes (i) in presence of an
acid and (ii) by hydroboration-oxidation reaction (2) from carbonyl compounds by
(i) catalytic reduction and (ii) the action of Grignard reagents. Phenols may be
prepared by (1) substitution of (i) halogen atom in haloarenes and (ii) sulphonic
acid group in aryl sulphonic acids, by –OH group (2) by hydrolysis of diazonium
salts and (3) industrially from cumene.
Alcohols are higher boiling than other classes of compounds, namely
hydrocarbons, ethers and haloalkanes of comparable molecular masses. The
ability of alcohols, phenols and ethers to form intermolecular hydrogen bonding
with water makes them soluble in it.
Alcohols and phenols are acidic in nature. Electron withdrawing groups in
phenol increase its acidic strength and electron releasing groups decrease it.
Alcohols undergo nucleophilic substitution with hydrogen halides to yield
alkyl halides. Dehydration of alcohols gives alkenes. On oxidation, primary alcohols
yield aldehydes with mild oxidising agents and carboxylic acids with strong
oxidising agents while secondary alcohols yield ketones. Tertiary alcohols are
resistant to oxidation.
The presence of –OH group in phenols activates the aromatic ring towards
electrophilic substitution and directs the incoming group to ortho and para
positions due to resonance effect. Reimer-Tiemann reaction of phenol yields
salicylaldehyde. In presence of sodium hydroxide, phenol generates phenoxide
ion which is even more reactive than phenol. Thus, in alkaline medium, phenol
undergoes Kolbe’s reaction.
Ethers may be prepared by (i) dehydration of alcohols and (ii) Williamson
synthesis. The boiling points of ethers resemble those of alkanes while their
solubility is comparable to those of alcohols having same molecular mass. The
C–O bond in ethers can be cleaved by hydrogen halides. In electrophilic
substitution, the alkoxy group activates the aromatic ring and directs the incoming
group to ortho and para positions.
221 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 30 ---

Exercises
7.1 Write IUPAC names of the following compounds:
(i) (ii)
(iii) (iv)
(v) (vi) (vii) (viii)
(ix) (x) C H –O–C H
6 5 2 5
(xi) C H –O–C H (n–) (xii)
6 5 7 15
7.2 Write structures of the compounds whose IUPAC names are as follows:
(i) 2-Methylbutan-2-ol (ii) 1-Phenylpropan-2-ol
(iii) 3,5-Dimethylhexane –1, 3, 5-triol (iv) 2,3 – Diethylphenol
(v) 1 – Ethoxypropane (vi) 2-Ethoxy-3-methylpentane
(vii) Cyclohexylmethanol (viii) 3-Cyclohexylpentan-3-ol
(ix) Cyclopent-3-en-1-ol (x) 4-Chloro-3-ethylbutan-1-ol.
7.3 (i) Draw the structures of all isomeric alcohols of molecular formula C H O
5 12
and give their IUPAC names.
(ii) Classify the isomers of alcohols in question 11.3 (i) as primary, secondary
and tertiary alcohols.
7.4 Explain why propanol has higher boiling point than that of the hydrocarbon,
butane?
7.5 Alcohols are comparatively more soluble in water than hydrocarbons of
comparable molecular masses. Explain this fact.
7.6 What is meant by hydroboration-oxidation reaction? Illustrate it with an example.
7.7 Give the structures and IUPAC names of monohydric phenols of molecular
formula, C H O.
7 8
7.8 While separating a mixture of ortho and para nitrophenols by steam
distillation, name the isomer which will be steam volatile. Give reason.
7.9 Give the equations of reactions for the preparation of phenol from cumene.
7.10 Write chemical reaction for the preparation of phenol from chlorobenzene.
7.11 Write the mechanism of hydration of ethene to yield ethanol.
7.12 You are given benzene, conc. H SO and NaOH. Write the equations for the
2 4
preparation of phenol using these reagents.
Chemistry 222
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 31 ---

7.13 Show how will you synthesise:
(i) 1-phenylethanol from a suitable alkene.
(ii) cyclohexylmethanol using an alkyl halide by an S 2 reaction.
N
(iii) pentan-1-ol using a suitable alkyl halide?
7.14 Give two reactions that show the acidic nature of phenol. Compare acidity
of phenol with that of ethanol.
7.15 Explain why is ortho nitrophenol more acidic than ortho methoxyphenol ?
7.16 Explain how does the –OH group attached to a carbon of benzene ring
activate it towards electrophilic substitution?
7.17 Give equations of the following reactions:
(i) Oxidation of propan-1-ol with alkaline KMnO solution.
4
(ii) Bromine in CS with phenol.
2
(iii) Dilute HNO with phenol.
3
(iv) Treating phenol wih chloroform in presence of aqueous NaOH.
7.18 Explain the following with an example.
(i) Kolbe’s reaction.
(ii) Reimer-Tiemann reaction.
(iii) Williamson ether synthesis.
(iv) Unsymmetrical ether.
7.19 Write the mechanism of acid dehydration of ethanol to yield ethene.
7.20 How are the following conversions carried out?
(i) Propene fi Propan-2-ol.
(ii) Benzyl chloride fi Benzyl alcohol.
(iii) Ethyl magnesium chloride fi Propan-1-ol.
(iv) Methyl magnesium bromide fi 2-Methylpropan-2-ol.
7.21 Name the reagents used in the following reactions:
(i) Oxidation of a primary alcohol to carboxylic acid.
(ii) Oxidation of a primary alcohol to aldehyde.
(iii) Bromination of phenol to 2,4,6-tribromophenol.
(iv) Benzyl alcohol to benzoic acid.
(v)Dehydration of propan-2-ol to propene.
(vi) Butan-2-one to butan-2-ol.
7.22 Give reason for the higher boiling point of ethanol in comparison to
methoxymethane.
223 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 32 ---

7.23 Give IUPAC names of the following ethers:
7.24 Write the names of reagents and equations for the preparation of the following
ethers by Williamson’s synthesis:
(i) 1-Propoxypropane (ii) Ethoxybenzene
(iii) 2-Methoxy-2-methylpropane (iv) 1-Methoxyethane
7.25 Illustrate with examples the limitations of Williamson synthesis for the
preparation of certain types of ethers.
7.26 How is 1-propoxypropane synthesised from propan-1-ol? Write mechanism
of this reaction.
7.27 Preparation of ethers by acid dehydration of secondary or tertiary alcohols
is not a suitable method. Give reason.
7.28 Write the equation of the reaction of hydrogen iodide with:
(i) 1-propoxypropane (ii) methoxybenzene and (iii) benzyl ethyl ether.
7.29 Explain the fact that in aryl alkyl ethers (i) the alkoxy group activates the
benzene ring towards electrophilic substitution and (ii) it directs the
incoming substituents to ortho and para positions in benzene ring.
7.30 Write the mechanism of the reaction of HI with methoxymethane.
7.31 Write equations of the following reactions:
(i) Friedel-Crafts reaction – alkylation of anisole.
(ii)Nitration of anisole.
(iii) Bromination of anisole in ethanoic acid medium.
(iv)Friedel-Craft’s acetylation of anisole.
7.32 Show how would you synthesise the following alcohols from appropriate
alkenes?
CH
3 OH
(i) OH (ii)
OH
(iii) (iv) OH
7.33 When 3-methylbutan-2-ol is treated with HBr, the following reaction takes
place:
Give a mechanism for this reaction.
(Hint : The secondary carbocation formed in step II rearranges to a more
stable tertiary carbocation by a hydride ion shift from 3rd carbon atom.
Chemistry 224
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 33 ---

Answers to Some Intext Questions
7.1 Primary alcohols (i), (ii), (iii)
Secondary alcohols (iv) and (v)
Tertiary alcohols (vi)
7.2 Allylic alcohols (ii) and (vi)
7.3 (i) 4-Chloro-3-ethyl-2-(1-methylethyl)-butan-1-ol
(ii) 2, 5-Dimethylhexane-1,3-diol
(iii) 3-Bromocyclohexanol
(iv) Hex-1-en-3-ol
(v) 2-Bromo-3-methylbut-2-en-1-ol
7.4
OH
CH C OCH
2 3
7.5 (i) CH CH CH (ii) O
3 3
OH
(iii) CH CH CH CHOH
3 2 2
CH
3
7.7 (i) 1-Methylcyclohexene
(ii) A Mixture of but-1-ene and but-2-ene. But-2-ene is the major product
formed due to rearrangement to give secondary carbocation.
7.10
HBr
CHOH CHBr
2 5 2 5
CH –CH –CH–CH– ONa + CHBr CH – CH – CH–CH – OCH
3 2 2 5 3 2 2 5
CH CH CH CH
3 3 3 3
2-Ethoxy-3-methylpentane
225 Alcohols, Phenols and Ethers
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 34 ---

7.11 (ii)
7.12 (i) CH CH CH OHCH Br (ii)
3 2 2 3
(iii) (iv) CH  CIC H OH
3 3 2 5
Chemistry 226
Reprint 2025-26