
--- Page 1 ---

C T
HAPTER WO
M S L
OTION IN A TRAIGHT INE
2.1 INTRODUCTION
Motion is common to everything in the universe. We walk,
run and ride a bicycle. Even when we are sleeping, air moves
2.1 Introduction into and out of our lungs and blood flows in arteries and
2.2 Instantaneous velocity and veins. We see leaves falling from trees and water flowing
speed down a dam. Automobiles and planes carry people from one
2.3
Acceleration place to the other. The earth rotates once every twenty-four
2.4 Kinematic equations for hours and revolves round the sun once in a year. The sun
uniformly accelerated motion itself is in motion in the Milky Way, which is again moving
2.5 Relative velocity within its local group of galaxies.
Motion is change in position of an object with time. How
Summary
does the position change with time ? In this chapter, we shall
Points to ponder
learn how to describe motion. For this, we develop the
Exercises
concepts of velocity and acceleration. We shall confine
ourselves to the study of motion of objects along a straight
line, also known as rectilinear motion. For the case of
rectilinear motion with uniform acceleration, a set of simple
equations can be obtained. Finally, to understand the relative
nature of motion, we introduce the concept of relative velocity.
In our discussions, we shall treat the objects in motion as
point objects. This approximation is valid so far as the size
of the object is much smaller than the distance it moves in a
reasonable duration of time. In a good number of situations
in real-life, the size of objects can be neglected and they can
be considered as point-like objects without much error.
In Kinematics, we study ways to describe motion without
going into the causes of motion. What causes motion
described in this chapter and the next chapter forms the
subject matter of Chapter 4.
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 2 ---

14 PHYSICS
2.2 INSTANTANEOUS VELOCITY AND SPEED
The average velocity tells us how fast an object
has been moving over a given time interval but
does not tell us how fast it moves at different
instants of time during that interval. For this,
we define instantaneous velocity or simply
velocity v at an instant t.
The velocity at an instant is defined as the
limit of the average velocity as the time interval
∆t becomes infinitesimally small. In other words,
∆x
v = lim
(2.1a)
∆ t → 0 ∆t
Fig. 2.1 Determining velocity from position-time
dx
= (2.1b) graph. Velocity at t = 4 s is the slope of the
dt tangent to the graph at that instant.
lim
where the symbol ∆t→0 stands for the operation Now, we decrease the value of ∆t from 2 s to 1
of taking limit as ∆tg0 of the quantity on its
s. Then line P P becomes Q Q and its slope
right. In the language of calculus, the quantity 1 2 1 2
gives the value of the average velocity over
on the right hand side of Eq. (2.1a) is the the interval 3.5 s to 4.5 s. In the limit ∆t → 0,
differential coefficient of x with respect to t and
the line P P becomes tangent to the position-
dx time curv 1 e a 2 t the point P and the velocity at t
is denoted by (see Appendix 2.1). It is the
dt = 4 s is given by the slope of the tangent at
rate of change of position with respect to time, that point. It is difficult to show this
process graphically. But if we use
at that instant.
numerical method to obtain the value of
We can use Eq. (2.1a) for obtaining the
the velocity, the meaning of the limiting
value of velocity at an instant either
process becomes clear. For the graph shown
graphically or numerically. Suppose that we
in Fig. 2.1, x = 0.08 t3. Table 2.1 gives the
want to obtain graphically the value of
value of ∆x/∆t calculated for ∆t equal to 2.0 s,
velocity at time t = 4 s (point P) for the motion
1.0 s, 0.5 s, 0.1 s and 0.01 s centred at t =
of the car represented in Fig.2.1 calculation.
4.0 s. The second and third columns give the
Let us take ∆t = 2 s centred at t = 4 s. Then,
by the definition of the average velocity, the  ∆t   ∆t
slope of line P P ( Fig. 2.1) gives the value of value of t 1 =  t − 2   and t 2 =  t+ 2   and the
1 2
average velocity over the interval 3 s to 5 s. fourth and the fifth columns give the
∆x
Table 2.1 Limiting value of at t = 4 s
∆t
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 3 ---

MOTION IN A STRAIGHT LINE 15
corresponding values of x, i.e. x (t ) = 0.08 t3 = a +16b –a –4b = 6.0×b
1 1 2.0
t3
and x (t
2
) = 0.08
2
. The sixth column lists the =6.0×2.5=15 m s-1 ⊳
difference ∆x = x (t ) – x (t ) and the last
2 1
column gives the ratio of ∆x and ∆t, i.e. the
Note that for uniform motion, velocity is
average velocity corresponding to the value the same as the average velocity at all
of ∆t listed in the first column. instants.
We see from Table 2.1 that as we decrease Instantaneous speed or simply speed is the
the value of ∆t from 2.0 s to 0.010 s, the value of magnitude of velocity. For example, a velocity of
the average velocity approaches the limiting + 24.0 m s–1 and a velocity of – 24.0 m s–1 —
value 3.84 m s–1 which is the value of velocity at both have an associated speed of 24.0 m s-1. It
should be noted that though average speed over
dx
t = 4.0 s, i.e. the value of at t = 4.0 s. In this a finite interval of time is greater or equal to the
dt
magnitude of the average velocity,
manner, we can calculate velocity at each
instantaneous speed at an instant is equal to
instant for motion of the car.
the magnitude of the instantaneous velocity at
The graphical method for the determination
that instant. Why so ?
of the instantaneous velocity is always not a
2.3 ACCELERATION
convenient method. For this, we must carefully
plot the position–time graph and calculate the The velocity of an object, in general, changes
value of average velocity as ∆t becomes smaller during its course of motion. How to describe
and smaller. It is easier to calculate the value this change? Should it be described as the rate
of velocity at different instants if we have data of change in velocity with distance or with
of positions at different instants or exact time ? This was a problem even in Galileo’s
expression for the position as a function of time. time. It was first thought that this change could
Then, we calculate ∆x/∆t from the data for be described by the rate of change of velocity
decreasing the value of ∆t and find the limiting with distance. But, through his studies of
value as we have done in Table 2.1 or use motion of freely falling objects and motion of
differential calculus for the given expression and objects on an inclined plane, Galileo concluded
that the rate of change of velocity with time is
dx
calculate at different instants as done in a constant of motion for all objects in free fall.
dt On the other hand, the change in velocity with
the following example. distance is not constant – it decreases with the
increasing distance of fall. This led to the
⊳ Example 2.1 The position of an object concept of acceleration as the rate of change
moving along x-axis is given by x = a + bt2 of velocity with time.
where a = 8.5 m, b = 2.5 m s–2 and t is The average acceleration a over a time interval
measured in seconds. What is its velocity at is defined as the change of velocity divided by
t = 0 s and t = 2.0 s. What is the average the time interval :
velocity between t = 2.0 s and t = 4.0 s ?
Answer In notation of differential calculus, the a = v 2 –v 1 = ∆v (2.2)
t –t ∆t
velocity is 2 1
v = dx = d ( a +bt2 ) =2b t =5.0 t m s-1 w or h s e i r m e p v 2 l y a n ve d l o v c 1 i a t r ie e s t h a e t i t n im st e a n t ta a n n e d o u t s . v e It l o i c s i t t i h e e s
dt dt 2 1
average change of velocity per u nit tim e. The SI
At t = 0 s, v = 0 m s–1 and at t = 2.0 s,
unit of acceleration is m s–2 .
v = 10 m s-1 .
On a plot of velocity versus time, the average
x
(4.0)−x (2.0) acceleration is the slope of the straight line
Average velocity = connecting the points corresponding to (v , t )
4.0−2.0 2 2
and (v , t ).
1 1
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 4 ---

16 PHYSICS
Instantaneous acceleration is defined in the (c) An object is moving in negative direction
same way as the instantaneous velocity : with a negative acceleration.
D v dv (d) An object is moving in positive direction
a = lim = (2.3) till time t , and then turns back with the
D fit 0 D t dt 1
same negative acceleration.
The acceleration at an instant is the slope
of the tangent to the v–t curve at that An interesting feature of a velocity-time
instant. graph for any moving object is that the area
Since velocity is a quantity having both under the curve represents the
magnitude and direction, a change in displacement over a given time interval. A
velocity may involve either or both of these general proof of this statement requires use of
factors. Acceleration, therefore, may result calculus. We can, however, see that it is true
from a change in speed (magnitude), a for the simple case of an object moving with
change in direction or changes in both. Like constant velocity u. Its velocity-time graph is
velocity, acceleration can also be positive, as shown in Fig. 2.4.
negative or zero. Position-time graphs for
motion with positive, negative and zero
acceleration are shown in Figs. 2.4 (a), (b)
and (c), respectively. Note that the graph
curves upward for positive acceleration;
downward for negative acceleration and it is
a straight line for zero acceleration.
Although acceleration can vary with time,
our study in this chapter will be restricted
to motion with constant acceleration. In this
case, the average acceleration equals the
constant value of acceleration during the
interval. If the velocity of an object is v at t
o
= 0 and v at time t, we have
v - v
a = 0 or, v =v +at
t - 0 0 (2.4)
Fig. 2.3 Velocity–time graph for motions with
Fig. 2.2 Position-time graph for motion with
constant acceleration. (a) Motion in positive
(a) positive acceleration; (b) negative
direction with positive acceleration,
acceleration, and (c) zero acceleration.
(b) Motion in positive direction with
Let us see how velocity-time graph looks like negative acceleration, (c) Motion in
for some simple cases. Fig. 2.3 shows velocity- negative direction with negative
acceleration, (d) Motion of an object with
time graph for motion with constant acceleration
negative acceleration that changes
for the following cases :
direction at time t . Between times 0 to
(a) An object is moving in a positive direction 1
t , it moves in positive x - direction
with a positive acceleration. 1
and between t and t it moves in the
(b) An object is moving in positive direction 1 2
opposite direction.
with a negative acceleration.
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 5 ---

MOTION IN A STRAIGHT LINE 17
Fig. 2.4 Area under v–t curve equals displacement
of the object over a given time interval.
The v-t curve isa straight line parallel to the
time axis and the area under it between t = 0
and t = T is the area of the rectangle of height u
and base T. Therefore, area = u × T = uT which
Fig. 2.5 Area under v-t curve for an object with
is the displacement in this time interval. How uniform acceleration.
come in this case an area is equal to a distance?
Think! Note the dimensions of quantities on
the two coordinate axes, and you will arrive at As explained in the previous section, the area
the answer. under v-t curve represents the displacement.
Therefore, the displacement x of the object is :
Note that the x-t, v-t, and a-t graphs shown
in several figures in this chapter have sharp 1( )
x = v–v t+v t (2.5)
kinks at some points implying that the 2 0 0
functions are not differentiable at these
But v −v =a t
points. In any realistic situation, the 0
functions will be differentiable at all points 1
Therefore,x = a t2+v t
and the graphs will be smooth. 2 0
What this means physically is that 1
or, x =v t + at2 (2.6)
acceleration and velocity cannot change 0 2
values abruptly at an instant. Changes are Equation (2.5) can also be written as
always continuous.
v+v
x = 0t =v t (2.7a)
2.4 KINEMATIC EQUATIONS FOR
2
UNIFORMLY ACCELERATED MOTION
where,
For uniformly accelerated motion, we can derive
some simple equations that relate displacement v+v
v = 0
(x), time taken (t), initial velocity (v ), final 2 (constant acceleration only)
0
velocity (v) and acceleration (a). Equation (2.4)
(2.7b)
already obtained gives a relation between final
and initial velocities v and v of an object moving Equations (2.7a) and (2.7b) mean that the object
0
with uniform accelerationa : has undergone displacement x with an average
velocity equal to the arithmetic average of the
v = v + at (2.4) initial and final velocities.
0
From Eq. (2.4), t = (v – v )/a. Substituting this in
This relation is graphically represented in Fig. 2.5. 0
Eq. (2.7a), we get
The area under this curve is :
Area between instants 0 and t = Area of triangle v +v v −v  v2 −v2
ABC + Area of rectangle OACD
x =v t =

 0



 0

 = 0
2 a 2a
1( )
= v–v t+v t v2 =v2 +2ax (2.8)
2 0 0 0
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 6 ---

18 PHYSICS
This equation can also be obtained by
substituting the value of t from Eq. (2.4) into Eq. = ∫ t( v +at ) dt
0
0
(2.6). Thus, we have obtained three important
equations : x –x =v t + 1 a t2
v =v +at 0 0 2
0
1
x =v t + 1 at2 x = x 0 +v 0 t + 2 a t2
0 2
We can write
v2 =v 0 2 +2ax (2.9a) a = dv = dv dx =v dv
dt dx dt dx
connecting five quantities v , v, a, t and x. These
0 or, v dv = a dx
are kinematic equations of rectilinear motion for
Integrating both sides,
constant acceleration.
The set of Eq. (2.9a) were obtained by ∫ v vdv = ∫ x adx
assuming that at t = 0, the position of the particle, v0 x0
x is 0. We can obtain a more general equation if
we take the position coordinate at t = 0 as non- v2 –v 0 2 = a ( x –x )
zero, say x . Then Eqs. (2.9a) are modified 2 0
0
(replacing x by x – x 0 ) to : v2 =v2 +2a ( x – x )
v =v +at 0 0
0 The advantage of this method is that it can be used
1 for motion with non-uniform acceleration
x = x +v t + at2 (2.9b)
0 0 2 also.
Now, we shall use these equations to some
v2 =v2 +2a(x −x ) (2.9c) important cases. ⊳
0 0
⊳ Example 2.3 A ball is thrown vertically
⊳ Example 2.2 Obtain equations of motion upwards with a velocity of 20 m s–1 from
for constant acceleration using method of the top of a multistorey building. The
calculus. height of the point from where the ball is
thrown is 25.0 m from the ground. (a) How
high will the ball rise ? and (b) how long
Answer By definition
will it be before the ball hits the ground?
a = dv Take g = 10 m s–2.
dt
dv = a dt
Answer (a) Let us take the y-axis in the
Integrating both sides
vertically upward direction with zero at the
∫ v dv = ∫ t a dt ground, as shown in Fig. 2.6.
v0 0
Now v = + 20 m s–1,
=a ∫ t dt (a is o a = – g = –10 m s–2,
0 v = 0 m s–1
constant)
If the ball rises to height y from the point of
v –v =at launch, then using the equation
0 ( )
v =v +at v2 = v 0 2 +2 a y– y 0
0
we get
dx
Further, v = 0 = (20)2 + 2(–10)(y – y )
dt 0
Solving, we get, (y – y ) = 20 m.
dx = v dt 0
Integrating both sides (b) We can solve this part of the problem in two
∫ x dx = ∫ t v dt ways. Note carefully the methods used.
x0 0
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 7 ---

MOTION IN A STRAIGHT LINE 19
0 = 25 +20 t + (½) (-10) t2
Or, 5t2 – 20t – 25 = 0
Solving this quadratic equation for t, we get
t = 5s
Note that the second method is better since we
do not have to worry about the path of the motion
as the motion is under constant acceleration.
⊳
⊳ Example 2.4 Free-fall : Discuss the
motion of an object under free fall. Neglect
air resistance.
Answer An object released near the surface of
the Earth is accelerated downward under the
influence of the force of gravity. The magnitude
of acceleration due to gravity is represented by
g. If air resistance is neglected, the object is
Fig. 2.6 said to be in free fall. If the height through
which the object falls is small compared to the
FIRST METHOD : In the first method, we split
earth’s radius, g can be taken to be constant,
the path in two parts : the upward motion (A to
equal to 9.8 m s–2. Free fall is thus a case of
B) and the downward motion (B to C) and
motion with uniform acceleration.
calculate the corresponding time taken t and
1 We assume that the motion is in y-direction,
t . Since the velocity at B is zero, we have :
2 more correctly in –y-direction because we
v = v + at
o choose upward direction as positive. Since the
0 = 20 – 10t
1 acceleration due to gravity is always downward,
Or, t = 2 s
1 it is in the negative direction and we have
This is the time in going from A to B. From B, or a = – g = – 9.8 m s–2
the point of the maximum height, the ball falls The object is released from rest at y = 0. Therefore,
freely under the acceleration due to gravity. The v = 0 and the equations of motion become:
0
ball is moving in negative y direction. We use
v = 0 – g t = –9.8 t m s–1
equation
y = 0 – ½ g t2 = –4.9 t2 m
1
y =y +v t + at2 v2 = 0 – 2 g y = –19.6 y m2 s–2
0 0 2 These equations give the velocity and the
We have, y = 45 m, y = 0, v = 0, a = – g = –10 m s–2
0 0 distance travelled as a function of time and also
0 = 45 + (½) (–10) t 2
2 the variation of velocity with distance. The
Solving, we get t = 3 s variation of acceleration, velocity, and distance,
2
with time have been plotted in Fig. 2.7(a), (b)
Therefore, the total time taken by the ball before
and (c).
it hits the ground = t + t = 2 s+ 3 s = 5 s.
1 2
SECOND METHOD : The total time taken can
also be calculated by noting the coordinates of
initial and final positions of the ball with respect
to the origin chosen and using equation
1
y =y +v t + at2
0 0 2
Now y = 25 m y = 0 m
0
v = 20 m s-1, a = –10m s–2, t = ? (a)
o
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 8 ---

20 PHYSICS
traversed during successive intervals of
time. Since initial velocity is zero, we have
1
y = − gt2
2
Using this equation, we can calculate the
position of the object after different time
τ τ τ
intervals, 0, , 2 , 3 … which are given in
second column of Table 2.2. If we take
τ
(–1/2) g 2 as y — the position coordinate after
0
τ
first time interval , then third column gives
(b) the positions in the unit of y . The fourth
o
column gives the distances traversed in
τ
successive s. We find that the distances are
in the simple ratio 1: 3: 5: 7: 9: 11… as shown
in the last column. This law was established
by Galileo Galilei (1564-1642) who was the first
to make quantitative studies of free fall. ⊳
⊳ Example 2.6 Stopping distance of
vehicles : When brakes are applied to a
moving vehicle, the distance it travels before
stopping is called stopping distance. It is
(c) an important factor for road safety and
depends on the initial velocity (v ) and the
Fig. 2.7 Motion of an object under free fall. 0
braking capacity, or deceleration, –a that
(a) Variation of acceleration with time.
is caused by the braking. Derive an
(b) Variation of velocity with time.
(c) Variation of distance with time ⊳ expression for stopping distance of a vehicle
in terms of v anda.
o
⊳ Example 2.5 Galileo’s law of odd Answer Let the distance travelled by the vehicle
numbers : “The distances traversed, during before it stops be d . Then, using equation of
equal intervals of time, by a body falling s
motion v2 = v 2 + 2 ax, and noting that v = 0, we
from rest, stand to one another in the same o
have the stopping distance
ratio as the odd numbers beginning with
unity [namely, 1: 3: 5: 7…...].” Prove it. –v2
d = 0
s 2a
Answer Let us divide the time interval of
motion of an object under free fall into many Thus, the stopping distance is proportional to
equal intervals τ and find out the distances the square of the initial velocity. Doubling the
Table 2.2
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 9 ---

MOTION IN A STRAIGHT LINE 21
initial velocity increases the stopping distance
by a factor of 4 (for the same deceleration).
For the car of a particular make, the braking
distance was found to be 10 m, 20 m, 34 m and
50 m corresponding to velocities of 11, 15, 20
and 25 m/s which are nearly consistent with
the above formula.
Stopping distance is an important factor
considered in setting speed limits, for example,
in school zones. ⊳
⊳ Example 2.7 Reaction time : When a
situation demands our immediate
action, it takes some time before we
really respond. Reaction time is the
time a person takes to observe, think
Fig. 2.8 Measuring the reaction time.
and act. For example, if a person is
driving and suddenly a boy appears on
the road, then the time elapsed before Answer The ruler drops under free fall.
he slams the brakes of the car is the Therefore, v = 0, and a = –g = –9.8 m s–2. The
o
reaction time. Reaction time depends distance travelled d and the reaction time t are
r
on complexity of the situation and on related by
an individual.
You can measure your reaction
time by a simple experiment. Take a
ruler and ask your friend to drop it
vertically through the gap between Or,
your thumb and forefinger (Fig. 2.8).
Given d = 21.0 cm and g = 9.8 m s–2 the reaction
After you catch it, find the distance d
time is
travelled by the ruler. In a particular
case, d was found to be 21.0 cm.
⊳
Estimate reaction time.
SUMMARY
1. An object is said to be in motion if its position changes with time. The position of the
object can be specified with reference to a conveniently chosen origin. For motion in
a straight line, position to the right of the origin is taken as positive and to the left as
negative.
The average speed of an object is greater or equal to the magnitude of the average
velocity over a given time interval.
2. Instantaneous velocity or simply velocity is defined as the limit of the average velocity
as the time interval ∆t becomes infinitesimally small :
∆x dx
v = lim v = lim =
∆t→0 ∆t→0 ∆t dt
The velocity at a particular instant is equal to the slope of the tangent drawn on
position-time graph at that instant.
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 10 ---

22 PHYSICS
3. Average acceleration is the change in velocity divided by the time interval during which
the change occurs :
∆v
a =
∆t
4. Instantaneous acceleration is defined as the limit of the average acceleration as the
time interval ∆t goes to zero :
∆v dv
a = lim a = lim =
∆t→0 ∆t→0 ∆t dt
The acceleration of an object at a particular time is the slope of the velocity-time
graph at that instant of time. For uniform motion, acceleration is zero and the x-t
graph is a straight line inclined to the time axis and the v-t graph is a straight line
parallel to the time axis. For motion with uniform acceleration, x-t graph is a parabola
while the v-t graph is a straight line inclined to the time axis.
5. The area under the velocity-time curve between times t and t is equal to the displacement
1 2
of the object during that interval of time.
6. For objects in uniformly accelerated rectilinear motion, the five quantities, displacement
x, time taken t, initial velocity v , final velocity v and acceleration a are related by a set
0
of simple equations called kinematic equations of motion :
v = v + at
0
1
x = v t + at2
0
2
v2 =v2 +2ax
0
if the position of the object at time t = 0 is 0. If the particle starts at x = x , x in above
0
equations is replaced by (x – x ).
0
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 11 ---

MOTION IN A STRAIGHT LINE 23
POINTS TO PONDER
1. The origin and the positive direction of an axis are a matter of choice. You should first specify
this choice before you assign signs to quantities like displacement, velocity and acceleration.
2. If a particle is speeding up, acceleration is in the direction of velocity; if its speed is
decreasing, acceleration is in the direction opposite to that of the velocity. This
statement is independent of the choice of the origin and the axis.
3. The sign of acceleration does not tell us whether the particle’s speed is increasing or
decreasing. The sign of acceleration (as mentioned in point 3) depends on the choice
of the positive direction of the axis. For example, if the vertically upward direction is
chosen to be the positive direction of the axis, the acceleration due to gravity is
negative. If a particle is falling under gravity, this acceleration, though negative,
results in increase in speed. For a particle thrown upward, the same negative
acceleration (of gravity) results in decrease in speed.
4. The zero velocity of a particle at any instant does not necessarily imply zero acceleration
at that instant. A particle may be momentarily at rest and yet have non-zero acceleration.
For example, a particle thrown up has zero velocity at its uppermost point but the
acceleration at that instant continues to be the acceleration due to gravity.
5. In the kinematic equations of motion [Eq. (2.9)], the various quantities are algebraic,
i.e. they may be positive or negative. The equations are applicable in all situations
(for one dimensional motion with constant acceleration) provided the values of different
quantities are substituted in the equations with proper signs.
6. The definitions of instantaneous velocity and acceleration (Eqs. (2.1) and (2.3)) are
exact and are always correct while the kinematic equations (Eq. (2.9)) are true only for
motion in which the magnitude and the direction of acceleration are constant during
the course of motion.
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 12 ---

24 PHYSICS
EXERCISES
2.1 In which of the following examples of motion, can the body be considered
approximately a point object:
(a) a railway carriage moving without jerks between two stations.
(b) a monkey sitting on top of a man cycling smoothly on a circular track.
(c) a spinning cricket ball that turns sharply on hitting the ground.
(d) a tumbling beaker that has slipped off the edge of a table.
2.2 The position-time (x-t) graphs for two children A and B returning from their school
O to their homes P and Q respectively are shown in Fig. 2.9. Choose the correct
entries in the brackets below ;
(a) (A/B) lives closer to the school than (B/A)
(b) (A/B) starts from the school earlier than (B/A)
(c) (A/B) walks faster than (B/A)
(d) A and B reach home at the (same/different) time
(e) (A/B) overtakes (B/A) on the road (once/twice).
Fig. 2.9
2.3 A woman starts from her home at 9.00 am, walks with a speed of 5 km h–1 on a
straight road up to her office 2.5 km away, stays at the office up to 5.00 pm, and
returns home by an auto with a speed of 25 km h–1. Choose suitable scales and
plot the x-t graph of her motion.
2.4 A drunkard walking in a narrow lane takes 5 steps forward and 3 steps backward,
followed again by 5 steps forward and 3 steps backward, and so on. Each step is 1 m
long and requires 1 s. Plot the x-t graph of his motion. Determine graphically and
otherwise how long the drunkard takes to fall in a pit 13 m away from the start.
–1
2.5 A car moving along a straight highway with speed of 126 km h is brought to a
stop within a distance of 200 m. What is the retardation of the car (assumed
uniform), and how long does it take for the car to stop ?
2.6 A player throws a ball upwards with an initial speed of 29.4 m s–1.
(a) What is the direction of acceleration during the upward motion of the ball ?
(b) What are the velocity and acceleration of the ball at the highest point of its motion ?
(c) Choose the x = 0 m and t = 0 s to be the location and time of the ball at its
highest point, vertically downward direction to be the positive direction of
x-axis, and give the signs of position, velocity and acceleration of the ball
during its upward, and downward motion.
(d) To what height does the ball rise and after how long does the ball return to the
player’s hands ? (Take g = 9.8 m s–2 and neglect air resistance).
2.7 Read each statement below carefully and state with reasons and examples, if it is
true or false ;
A particle in one-dimensional motion
(a) with zero speed at an instant may have non-zero acceleration at that instant
(b) with zero speed may have non-zero velocity,
(c) with constant speed must have zero acceleration,
(d) with positive value of acceleration must be speeding up.
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 13 ---

MOTION IN A STRAIGHT LINE 25
2.8 A ball is dropped from a height of 90 m on a floor. At each collision with the floor,
the ball loses one tenth of its speed. Plot the speed-time graph of its motion
between t = 0 to 12 s.
2.9 Explain clearly, with examples, the distinction between :
(a) magnitude of displacement (sometimes called distance) over an interval of time,
and the total length of path covered by a particle over the same interval;
(b) magnitude of average velocity over an interval of time, and the average speed
over the same interval. [Average speed of a particle over an interval of time is
defined as the total path length divided by the time interval]. Show in both (a)
and (b) that the second quantity
is either greater than or equal to
the first. When is the equality sign
true ? [For simplicity, consider
one-dimensional motion only].
2.10 A man walks on a straight road from
his home to a market 2.5 km away with
a speed of 5 km h–1. Finding the
market closed, he instantly turns and
walks back home with a speed of 7.5
km h–1. What is the
(a) magnitude of average velocity, and
(b) average speed of the man over the
interval of time (i) 0 to 30 min, (ii)
0 to 50 min, (iii) 0 to 40 min ?
[Note: You will appreciate from this
exercise why it is better to define
average speed as total path length
divided by time, and not as
magnitude of average velocity. You
would not like to tell the tired man
on his return home that his
average speed was zero !] Fig. 2.10
2.11 In Exercises 2.9 and 2.10, we have
carefully distinguished between
average speed and magnitude of average
velocity. No such distinction is necessary when
we consider instantaneous speed and
magnitude of velocity. The instantaneous speed
is always equal to the magnitude of
instantaneous velocity. Why?
2.12 Look at the graphs (a) to (d) (Fig. 2.10) carefully
and state, with reasons, which of these cannot
possibly represent one-dimensional motion of
a particle.
2.13 Figure 2.11shows the x-t plot of one-
dimensional motion of a particle. Is it correct
to say from the graph that the particle moves Fig. 2.11
in a straight line for t < 0 and on a parabolic
path for t >0 ? If not, suggest a suitable physical
context for this graph.
2.14 A police van moving on a highway with a speed of
30 km h–1 fires a bullet at a thief’s car speeding away in
the same direction with a speed of 192 km h–1. If the muzzle
speed of the bullet is 150 m s–1, with what speed does the
bullet hit the thief’s car ? (Note: Obtain that speed which
is relevant for damaging the thief’s car).
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 14 ---

26 PHYSICS
2.15 Suggest a suitable physical situation for each of the following graphs (Fig 2.12):
Fig. 2.12
2.16 Figure 2.13 gives the x-t plot of a particle executing one-dimensional simple
harmonic motion. (You will learn about this motion in more detail in Chapter13).
Give the signs of position, velocity and acceleration variables of the particle at
t = 0.3 s, 1.2 s, – 1.2 s.
Fig. 2.13
2.17 Figure 2.14 gives the x-t plot of a
particle in one-dimensional motion.
Three different equal intervals of time
are shown. In which interval is the
average speed greatest, and in which
is it the least ? Give the sign of average
velocity for each interval.
Fig. 2.14
2.18 Figure 2.15 gives a speed-time graph of
a particle in motion along a constant
direction. Three equal intervals of time
are shown. In which interval is the
average acceleration greatest in
magnitude? In which interval is the
average speed greatest ? Choosing the
positive direction as the constant
direction of motion, give the signs of v
and a in the three intervals. What are
the accelerations at the points A, B, C
and D ? Fig. 2.15
Reprint 2025-26