
--- Page 1 ---

C F
HAPTER IVE
W , E P
ORK NERGY AND OWER
5.1 INTRODUCTION
The terms ‘work’, ‘energy’ and ‘power’ are frequently used
in everyday language. A farmer ploughing the field, a
5.1 Introduction construction worker carrying bricks, a student studying for
a competitive examination, an artist painting a beautiful
5.2 Notions of work and kinetic
landscape, all are said to be working. In physics, however,
energy : The work-energy
the word ‘Work’ covers a definite and precise meaning.
theorem
Somebody who has the capacity to work for 14-16 hours a
5.3 Work
day is said to have a large stamina or energy. We admire a
5.4 Kinetic energy
long distance runner for her stamina or energy. Energy is
5.5 Work done by a variable force
thus our capacity to do work. In Physics too, the term ‘energy’
5.6 The work-energy theorem for is related to work in this sense, but as said above the term
a variable force ‘work’ itself is defined much more precisely. The word ‘power’
5.7 The concept of potential is used in everyday life with different shades of meaning. In
energy karate or boxing we talk of ‘powerful’ punches. These are
5.8 The conservation of delivered at a great speed. This shade of meaning is close to
mechanical energy the meaning of the word ‘power’ used in physics. We shall
5.9 The potential energy of a find that there is at best a loose correlation between the
spring physical definitions and the physiological pictures these
5.10Power terms generate in our minds. The aim of this chapter is to
5.11Collisions develop an understanding of these three physical quantities.
Before we proceed to this task, we need to develop a
Summary
mathematical prerequisite, namely the scalar product of two
Points to ponder
vectors.
Exercises
5.1.1 The Scalar Product
We have learnt about vectors and their use in Chapter 3.
Physical quantities like displacement, velocity, acceleration,
force etc. are vectors. We have also learnt how vectors are
added or subtracted. We now need to know how vectors are
multiplied. There are two ways of multiplying vectors which
we shall come across : one way known as the scalar product
gives a scalar from two vectors and the other known as the
vector product produces a new vector from two vectors. We
shall look at the vector product in Chapter 6. Here we take
up the scalar product of two vectors. The scalar product or
dot product of any two vectors A and B, denoted as A.B (read
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 2 ---

72 PHYSICS
A dot B) is defined as ɵ ɵ ɵ
A = A i+ A j+ A k
A.B = A B cos θ (5.1a) x y z
ɵ ɵ ɵ
B= B i+B j+B k
where θ is the angle between the two vectors as x y z
shown in Fig. 5.1(a). Since A, B and cos θ are their scalar product is
( ) ( )
scalars, the dot product of A and B is a scalar A.B= A ˆi+ A ˆj+ A kˆ . B ˆi+B ˆj+B kˆ
quantity. Each vector, A and B, has a direction x y z x y z
but their scalar product does not have a = A B + A B + A B (5.1b)
x x y y z z
direction.
From the definition of scalar product and
From Eq. (5.1a), we have (Eq. 5.1b) we have :
A.B = A (B cos θ ) ( i ) A . A = A x A x + A y A y + A z A z
= B (A cos θ ) Or, A2 = A2 + A2 + A2 (5.1c)
x y z
Geometrically, B cos θ is the projection of B onto sinceA.A = |A ||A| cos 0 = A2.
A in Fig.5.1 (b) and A cos θ is the projection of A (ii) A.B = 0, if A and B are perpendicular.
onto B in Fig. 5.1 (c). So, A.B is the product of
the magnitude of A and the component of B along u Example 5.1 Find the angle between force
A. Alternatively, it is the product of the F = (3 ˆi+4 ˆj-5kˆ )unit and displacement
magnitude of B and the component of A along B.
d = (5 ˆi+4 ˆj+3kˆ )unit. Also find the
Equation (5.1a) shows that the scalar product
follows the commutative law : projection of F on d.
.
A.B = B.A Answer F d =F d +F d +F d
x x y y z z
= 3 (5) + 4 (4) + (– 5) (3)
Scalar product obeys the distributive
= 16 unit
law:
.
A. (B + C) = A.B + A.C Hence F d = Fd cosθ = 16 unit
.
Further, A. (λ B) = λ (A.B) Now F F = F2 = F x 2 + F y 2 +F z 2
where λ is a real number. = 9 + 16 + 25
= 50 unit
The proofs of the above equations are left to
.
you as an exercise. and d d = d2 = d2 + d2 +d2
x y z
ɵ ɵ ɵ = 25 + 16 + 9
For unit vectors i,j,k we have
= 50 unit
ɵ ɵ ɵ ɵ ɵ ɵ
i⋅i = j⋅ j= k⋅k =1
16 16
ɵ ɵ ɵ ɵ ɵ ɵ ∴ cos θ = = =0.32,
i⋅j= j⋅k= k⋅i = 0 50 50 50
θ= cos–1 0.32
Given two vectors
Fig. 5.1 (a) The scalar product of two vectors A and B is a scalar : A.B = A B cos θ. (b) B cos θ is the projection
of B onto A. (c) A cos θ is the projection of A onto B.
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 3 ---

WORK, ENERGY AND POWER 73
⊳
5.2 NOTIONS OF WORK AND KINETIC
to be proportional to the speed of the drop
ENERGY: THE WORK-ENERGY THEOREM
but is otherwise undetermined. Consider
The following relation for rectilinear motion under
a drop of mass 1.00 g falling from a height
constant acceleration a has been encountered
1.00 km. It hits the ground with a speed of
in Chapter 3, 50.0 m s-1. (a) What is the work done by the
v2 − u2 = 2 as (5.2) gravitational force ? What is the work done
where u and v are the initial and final speeds by the unknown resistive force?
and s the distance traversed. Multiplying both
Answer (a) The change in kinetic energy of the
sides by m/2, we have
drop is
1 1 1
mv2 − mu2 =mas = Fs (5.2a) ∆K = m v2 −0
2 2 2
where the last step follows from Newton’s Second 1
= ×10-3 ×50×50
Law. We can generalise Eq. (5.2) to three 2
dimensions by employing vectors = 1.25 J
v2 − u2 = 2 a.d where we have assumed that the drop is initially
at rest.
Here a and d are acceleration and displacement
Assuming that g is a constant with a value
vectors of the object respectively.
10 m/s2, the work done by the gravitational force
Once again multiplying both sides by m/2 , we obtain
is,
1 1
mv2 − mu2 =m a.d =F.d (5.2b) W g = mgh
2 2 = 10-3 ×10 ×103
The above equation provides a motivation for = 10.0 J
the definitions of work and kinetic energy. The
(b) From the work-energy theorem
left side of the equation is the difference in the
∆K = W +W
quantity ‘half the mass times the square of the g r
speed’ from its initial value to its final value. We where W is the work done by the resistive force
r
call each of these quantities the ‘kinetic energy’, on the raindrop. Thus
denoted by K. The right side is a product of the W = ∆K − W
r g
displacement and the component of the force = 1.25 −10
along the displacement. This quantity is called = − 8.75 J
‘work’ and is denoted by W. Eq. (5.2b) is then
is negative. ⊳
K − K = W (5.3) 5.3 WORK
f i
where K and K are respectively the initial and As seen earlier, work is related to force and the
i f
final kinetic energies of the object. Work refers displacement over which it acts. Consider a
to the force and the displacement over which it constant force F acting on an object of mass m.
acts. Work is done by a force on the body over The object undergoes a displacement d in the
a certain displacement. positive x-direction as shown in Fig. 5.2.
Equation (5.2) is also a special case of the
work-energy (WE) theorem : The change in
kinetic energy of a particle is equal to the
work done on it by the net force. We shall
generalise the above derivation to a varying force
in a later section.
Example 5.2 It is well known that a
raindrop falls under the influence of the
Fig. 5.2 An object undergoes a displacement d
downward gravitational force and the
under the influence of the force F.
opposing resistive force. The latter is known
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 4 ---

74 PHYSICS
The work done by the force is defined to be Table 5.1 Alternative Units of Work/Energy in J
the product of component of the force in the
direction of the displacement and the
magnitude of this displacement. Thus
W = (F cos θ )d = F.d (5.4)
We see that if there is no displacement, there
is no work done even if the force is large. Thus,
when you push hard against a rigid brick wall,
the force you exert on the wall does no work. Yet ⊳ Example 5.3 A cyclist comes to a skidding
your muscles are alternatively contracting and stop in 10 m. During this process, the force
relaxing and internal energy is being used up on the cycle due to the road is 200 N and
and you do get tired. Thus, the meaning of work is directly opposed to the motion. (a) How
in physics is different from its usage in everyday much work does the road do on the cycle ?
language. (b) How much work does the cycle do on
the road ?
No work is done if :
(i) the displacement is zero as seen in the
example above. A weightlifter holding a 150 Answer Work done on the cycle by the road is
kg mass steadily on his shoulder for 30 s the work done by the stopping (frictional) force
does no work on the load during this time. on the cycle due to the road.
(ii) the force is zero. A block moving on a smooth (a) The stopping force and the displacement make
horizontal table is not acted upon by a an angle of 180o (π rad) with each other.
horizontal force (since there is no friction), but Thus, work done by the road,
may undergo a large displacement. W = Fd cosθ
r
(iii) the force and displacement are mutually
= 200 × 10 × cos π
perpendicular. This is so since, for θ = π/2 rad
(= 90o), cos (π/2) = 0. For the block moving on = – 2000 J
It is this negative work that brings the cycle
a smooth horizontal table, the gravitational
to a halt in accordance with WE theorem.
force mg does no work since it acts at right
(b) From Newton’s Third Law an equal and
angles to the displacement. If we assume that
opposite force acts on the road due to the
the moon’s orbits around the earth is
cycle. Its magnitude is 200 N. However, the
perfectly circular then the earth’s
road undergoes no displacement. Thus,
gravitational force does no work. The moon’s
work done by cycle on the road is zero. ⊳
instantaneous displacement is tangential
while the earth’s force is radially inwards and The lesson of Example 5.3 is that though the
θ = π/2. force on a body A exerted by the body B is always
Work can be both positive and negative. If θ is equal and opposite to that on B by A (Newton’s
between 0o and 90o, cos θ in Eq. (5.4) is positive. Third Law); the work done on A by B is not
If θ is between 90o and 180o, cos θ is negative. necessarily equal and opposite to the work done
In many examples the frictional force opposes on B by A.
displacement and θ = 180o. Then the work done
5.4 KINETIC ENERGY
by friction is negative (cos 180o = –1).
As noted earlier, if an object of mass m has
From Eq. (5.4) it is clear that work and energy
velocity v, its kinetic energy K is
have the same dimensions, [ML2T–2]. The SI unit
of these is joule (J), named after the famous British
1 1
physicist James Prescott Joule (1811-1869). Since K = m v.v = mv2 (5.5)
2 2
work and energy are so widely used as physical
concepts, alternative units abound and some of Kinetic energy is a scalar quantity. The kinetic
these are listed in Table 5.1. energy of an object is a measure of the work an
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 5 ---

WORK, ENERGY AND POWER 75
Table 5.2 Typical kinetic energies (K)
object can do by the virtue of its motion. This This is illustrated in Fig. 5.3(a). Adding
notion has been intuitively known for a long time. successive rectangular areas in Fig. 5.3(a) we
The kinetic energy of a fast flowing stream get the total work done as
has been used to grind corn. Sailing x
∑f ( )
ships employ the kinetic energy of the wind. Table W≅ F x ∆x (5.6)
5.2 lists the kinetic energies for various x
i
objects. where the summation is from the initial position
x to the final position x.
⊳ Example 5.4 In a ballistics demonstration i f
a police officer fires a bullet of mass 50.0 g If the displacements are allowed to approach
with speed 200 m s-1 (see Table 5.2) on soft zero, then the number of terms in the sum
plywood of thickness 2.00 cm. The bullet increases without limit, but the sum approaches
emerges with only 10% of its initial kinetic a definite value equal to the area under the curve
energy. What is the emergent speed of the in Fig. 5.3(b). Then the work done is
bullet ?
lim x
W = lim ∑f F ( x ) ∆x
Answer The initial kinetic energy of the bullet ∆x →0
x
is mv2/2 = 1000 J. It has a final kinetic energy i
o o f f 0 th .1 e × b 1 u 0 l 0 le 0 t , = 100 J. If v f is the emergent speed = x ∫ f F ( x ) dx
(5.7)
1
mv 2 =100 J
xi
2 f where ‘lim’ stands for the limit of the sum when
∆x tends to zero. Thus, for a varying force
2×100 J the work done can be expressed as a definite
v =
f 0.05 kg integral of force over displacement (see also
Appendix 3.1).
= 63.2 m s–1
The speed is reduced by approximately 68%
(not 90%). ⊳
5.5 WORK DONE BY A VARIABLE FORCE
A constant force is rare. It is the variable force,
which is more commonly encountered. Fig. 5.3
is a plot of a varying force in one dimension.
If the displacement ∆x is small, we can take
the force F(x) as approximately constant and
the work done is then
∆W =F(x) ∆x Fig. 5.3(a)
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 6 ---

76 PHYSICS
The work done by the frictional force is
W → area of the rectangle AGHI
f
W = (−50) × 20
f
= − 1000 J
The area on the negative side of the force axis
has a negative sign. ⊳
5.6 THE WORK-ENERGY THEOREM FOR A
VARIABLE FORCE
We are now familiar with the concepts of work
Fig. 5.3 (a) The shaded rectangle represents the
and kinetic energy to prove the work-energy
work done by the varying force F(x), over
the small displacement ∆x, ∆W = F(x) ∆x. theorem for a variable force. We confine
(b) adding the areas of all the rectangles we ourselves to one dimension. The time rate of
find that for ∆x → 0, the area under the curve change of kinetic energy is
is exactly equal to the work done by F(x).
dK d 1 
=  m v2
 
⊳ Example 5.5 A woman pushes a trunk on dt dt 2
a railway platform which has a rough
dv
surface. She applies a force of 100 N over a =m v
dt
distance of 10 m. Thereafter, she gets
progressively tired and her applied force =F v (from Newton’s Second Law)
reduces linearly with distance to 50 N. The
dx
total distance through which the trunk has = F
dt
been moved is 20 m. Plot the force applied
Thus
by the woman and the frictional force, which
dK = Fdx
is 50 N versus displacement. Calculate the
Integrating from the initial position (x ) to final
work done by the two forces over 20 m. i
position ( x ), we have
f
Answer Kf xf
∫ dK = ∫ Fdx
Ki xi
where, K and K are the initial and final kinetic
i f
energies corresponding to x and x .
i f
xf
K −K = ∫ Fdx
or f i (5.8a)
Fig. 5.4 Plot of the force F applied by the woman and
xi
the opposing frictional force f versus
From Eq. (5.7), it follows that
displacement.
K − K = W (5.8b)
The plot of the applied force is shown in Fig. f i
5.4. At x = 20 m, F = 50 N (≠ 0). We are given Thus, the WE theorem is proved for a variable
that the frictional force f is |f|= 50 N. It opposes force.
motion and acts in a direction opposite to F. It While the WE theorem is useful in a variety of
is therefore, shown on the negative side of the problems, it does not, in general, incorporate the
force axis. complete dynamical information of Newton’s
The work done by the woman is
second law. It is an integral form of Newton’s
W → area of the rectangle ABCD + area of second law. Newton’s second law is a relation
F
the trapezium CEID between acceleration and force at any instant of
W F =100×10+ 1 2 ( 100+50 )×10 t o i v m er e a . n W i o n r t k e - r e v n al e o r f g t y im th e e . o In re t m hi s i n se v n ol s v e e , s th a e n t e in m t p eg o r r a a l l
= 1000 + 750 (time) information contained in the statement of
= 1750 J Newton’s second law is ‘integrated over’ and is
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 7 ---

WORK, ENERGY AND POWER 77
not available explicitly. Another observation is that are like ‘compressed springs’. They possess a
Newton’s second law for two or three dimensions large amount of potential energy. An earthquake
is in vector form whereas the work-energy results when these fault lines readjust. Thus,
theorem is in scalar form. In the scalar form, potential energy is the ‘stored energy’ by virtue
information with respect to directions contained of the position or configuration of a body. The
in Newton’s second law is not present. body left to itself releases this stored energy in
the form of kinetic energy. Let us make our notion
⊳ Example 5.6 A block of mass m = 1 kg, of potential energy more concrete.
moving on a horizontal surface with speed The gravitational force on a ball of mass m is
v = 2 m s–1 enters a rough patch ranging mg . g may be treated as a constant near the earth
i
from x = 0.10 m to x = 2.01 m. The retarding surface. By ‘near’ we imply that the height h of
force F on the block in this range is inversely the ball above the earth’s surface is very small
r
proportional to x over this range, compared to the earth’s radius R (h <<R ) so that
E E
−k we can ignore the variation of g near the earth’s
F r = x for 0.1 < x < 2.01 m surface*. In what follows we have taken the
upward direction to be positive. Let us raise the
= 0 for x < 0.1m and x > 2.01 m
ball up to a height h. The work done by the external
where k = 0.5 J. What is the final kinetic
agency against the gravitational force is mgh. This
energy and speed v of the block as it
f work gets stored as potential energy.
crosses this patch ?
Gravitational potential energy of an object, as a
function of the height h, is denoted by V(h) and it
Answer From Eq. (5.8a) is the negative of work done by the gravitational
2.01(−k ) force in raising the object to that height.
K = K + ∫ dx V (h) = mgh
f i x
0.1 If h is taken as a variable, it is easily seen that
the gravitational force F equals the negative of
= 1 mv2 −k ln ( x ) 2.01 the derivative of V(h) with respect to h. Thus,
2 i 0.1
d
F = − V(h) = −m g
= 1 mv2 −k ln ( 2.01/0.1 ) dh
2 i The negative sign indicates that the
= 2 − 0.5 ln (20.1) gravitational force is downward. When released,
the ball comes down with an increasing speed.
= 2 − 1.5 = 0.5 J
Just before it hits the ground, its speed is given
v = 2K /m =1 m s −1 by the kinematic relation,
f f v2 = 2gh
This equation can be written as
Here, note that ln is a symbol for the natural
1
logarithm to the base e and not the logarithm to
the base 10 [ln X = log X = 2.303 log X]. ⊳ 2 m v2 = m g h
e 10
which shows that the gravitational potential
5.7 THE CONCEPT OF POTENTIAL ENERGY
energy of the object at height h, when the object
The word potential suggests possibility or is released, manifests itself as kinetic energy of
capacity for action. The term potential energy the object on reaching the ground.
brings to one’s mind ‘stored’ energy. A stretched Physically, the notion of potential energy is
bow-string possesses potential energy. When it applicable only to the class of forces where work
is released, the arrow flies off at a great speed. done against the force gets ‘stored up’ as energy.
The earth’s crust is not uniform, but has When external constraints are removed, it
discontinuities and dislocations that are called manifests itself as kinetic energy. Mathematically,
fault lines. These fault lines in the earth’s crust (for simplicity, in one dimension) the potential
* The variation of g with height is discussed in Chapter 7 on Gravitation.
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 8 ---

78 PHYSICS
energy V(x) is defined if the force F(x) can be which means that K + V, the sum of the kinetic
written as and potential energies of the body is a constant.
Over the whole path, x to x, this means that
F ( x )= − dV K + V(x ) = K + V i (x ) f (5.11)
dx i i f f
The quantity K +V(x), is called the total
This implies that
mechanical energy of the system. Individually
xf Vf the kinetic energy K and the potential energy
∫ F(x)dx = −∫ dV =V −V
i f V(x) may vary from point to point, but the sum
xi Vi
is a constant. The aptness of the term
The work done by a conservative force such as ‘conservative force’ is now clear.
gravity depends on the initial and final positions Let us consider some of the definitions of a
only. In the previous chapter we have worked conservative force.
on examples dealing with inclined planes. If an l A force F(x) is conservative if it can be derived
object of mass m is released from rest, from the
from a scalar quantity V(x) by the relation
top of a smooth (frictionless) inclined plane of
given by Eq. (5.9). The three-dimensional
height h, its speed at the bottom generalisation requires the use of a vector
is 2ghirrespective of the angle of inclination. derivative, which is outside the scope of this
book.
Thus, at the bottom of the inclined plane it
l The work done by the conservative force
acquires a kinetic energy, mgh. If the work done
depends only on the end points. This can be
or the kinetic energy did depend on other factors
seen from the relation,
such as the velocity or the particular path taken
W = K – K = V (x) – V(x )
by the object, the force would be called non- f i i f
which depends on the end points.
conservative.
l A third definition states that the work done
The dimensions of potential energy are
by this force in a closed path is zero. This is
[ML2T –2] and the unit is joule (J), the same as
once again apparent from Eq. (5.11) since
kinetic energy or work. To reiterate, the change
x = x
in potential energy, for a conservative force, i f .
∆V is equal to the negative of the work done by Thus, the principle of conservation of total
mechanical energy can be stated as
the force
∆V = − F(x) ∆x (5.9) The total mechanical energy of a system is
In the example of the falling ball considered in conserved if the forces, doing work on it, are
this section we saw how potential energy was conservative.
The above discussion can be made more
converted to kinetic energy. This hints at an
concrete by considering the example of the
important principle of conservation in mechanics,
gravitational force once again and that of the
which we now proceed to examine.
spring force in the next section. Fig. 5.5 depicts
5.8 THE CONSERVATION OF MECHANICAL a ball of mass m being dropped from a cliff of
ENERGY height H.
For simplicity we demonstrate this important
principle for one-dimensional motion. Suppose
that a body undergoes displacement ∆x under
the action of a conservative force F. Then from
the WE theorem we have,
∆K = F(x) ∆x
If the force is conservative, the potential energy
function V(x) can be defined such that
− ∆V = F(x) ∆x
The above equations imply that Fig. 5.5 The conversion of potential energy to kinetic
∆K + ∆V = 0 energy for a ball of mass m dropped from a
∆(K + V) = 0 (5.10) height H.
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 9 ---

WORK, ENERGY AND POWER 79
The total mechanical energies E , E , and E Answer (i) There are two external forces on
0 h H
of the ball at the indicated heights zero (ground the bob : gravity and the tension (T) in the
level), h and H, are string. The latter does no work since the
displacement of the bob is always normal to the
E = mgH (5.11 a)
H string. The potential energy of the bob is thus
1
E =mgh + mv2 (5.11 b) associated with the gravitational force only. The
h 2 h
total mechanical energy E of the system is
E = (1/2) mv2 (5.11 c)
0 f conserved. We take the potential energy of the
The constant force is a special case of a spatially system to be zero at the lowest point A. Thus,
dependent force F(x). Hence, the mechanical at A :
energy is conserved. Thus
E = E
1
H 1 0 E = mv 2 (5.12)
or, mgH = mv2 2 0
2 f
v = 2gH [Newton’s Second Law]
f
a result that was obtained in section 5.7 for a
where T is the tension in the string at A. At the
freely falling body. A
highest point C, the string slackens, as the
Further,
tension in the string (T ) becomes zero.
E = E C
H h Thus, at C
which implies,
1
v h 2 = 2g(H - h) (5.11 d) E = mv2+2mgL (5.13)
2 c
and is a familiar result from kinematics.
At the height H, the energy is purely potential. mv2
It is partially converted to kinetic at height h and mg= c [Newton’s Second Law] (5.14)
L
is fully kinetic at ground level. This illustrates
the conservation of mechanical energy. where v is the speed at C. From Eqs. (5.13)
C
and (5.14)
⊳ Example 5.7 A bob of mass m is suspended
5
by a light string of length L . It is imparted a E = mgL
horizontal velocity v at the lowest point A 2
o
such that it completes a semi-circular Equating this to the energy at A
trajectory in the vertical plane with the string
5 m
becoming slack only on reaching the topmost mgL = v2
2 2 0
point, C. This is shown in Fig. 5.6. Obtain an
expression for (i) v ; (ii) the speeds at points or, v = 5gL
o 0
B and C; (iii) the ratio of the kinetic energies
(ii) It is clear from Eq. (5.14)
(K /K ) at B and C. Comment on the nature
B C
of the trajectory of the bob after it reaches v = gL
C
the point C.
At B, the energy is
1
E = mv2 +mgL
2 B
Equating this to the energy at A and employing
the result from (i), namely v2 =5gL ,
0
1 1
mv2 +mgL = mv2
2 B 2 0
5
= m g L
2
Fig. 5.6
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 10 ---

80 PHYSICS
∴v B = 3gL W =+ k x m 2 (5.16)
2
(iii) The ratio of the kinetic energies at B and C
is :
1
mv2
K B = 2 B = 3
K C 1 mv2 1
2 C
At point C, the string becomes slack and the
velocity of the bob is horizontal and to the left. If
the connecting string is cut at this instant, the
bob will execute a projectile motion with
horizontal projection akin to a rock kicked
horizontally from the edge of a cliff. Otherwise
the bob will continue on its circular path and
complete the revolution. ⊳
5.9 THE POTENTIAL ENERGY OF A SPRING
The spring force is an example of a variable force
which is conservative. Fig. 5.7 shows a block
attached to a spring and resting on a smooth
horizontal surface. The other end of the spring
is attached to a rigid wall. The spring is light
and may be treated as massless. In an ideal
spring, the spring force F is proportional to
s
x where x is the displacement of the block from
the equilibrium position. The displacement could
be either positive [Fig. 5.7(b)] or negative
[Fig. 5.7(c)]. This force law for the spring is called
Hooke’s law and is mathematically stated as
F = − kx
s
The constant k is called the spring constant. Its
unit is N m-1. The spring is said to be stiff if k is
large and soft if k is small.
Fig. 5.7 Illustration of the spring force with a block
Suppose that we pull the block outwards as in
attached to the free end of the spring.
Fig. 5.7(b). If the extension is x , the work done by (a) The spring force F is zero when the
m s
the spring force is displacement x from the equilibrium position
is zero. (b) For the stretched spring x > 0
xm xm and F < 0 (c) For the compressed spring
W
s
= ∫ F
s
dx = −∫ kx dx x < 0 a s n d F
s
> 0.(d) The plot of F
s
versus x.
0 0 The area of the shaded triangle represents
the work done by the spring force. Due to the
k x2 opposing signs of F and x, this work done is
=− m (5.15) s
2 negative, W = −kx 2 /2.
s m
This expression may also be obtained by
considering the area of the triangle as in
The same is true when the spring is
Fig. 5.7(d). Note that the work done by the
compressed with a displacement x (< 0). The
external pulling force F is positive since it c
overcomes the spring force. spring force does work W =− kx2/2 while the
s c
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 11 ---

WORK, ENERGY AND POWER 81
external force F does work + kx 2 /2. If the block and vice versa, however, the total mechanical
c energy remains constant. This is graphically
is moved from an initial displacement x to a
i depicted in Fig. 5.8.
final displacement x , the work done by the
f
spring force W is
s
W
s
=− x ∫ f k x dx = k
2
x i 2 − k
2
x2 f (5.17)
xi
Thus the work done by the spring force depends
only on the end points. Specifically, if the block
is pulled from x and allowed to return to x ;
i i
W
s
=− x ∫ i k x dx = k
2
x i 2 − k
2
x i 2
xi
= 0 (5.18) Fig. 5.8 Parabolic plots of the potential energy V and
The work done by the spring force in a cyclic kinetic energy K of a block attached to a
spring obeying Hooke’s law. The two plots
process is zero. We have explicitly demonstrated
are complementary, one decreasing as the
that the spring force (i) is position dependent
other increases. The total mechanical
only as first stated by Hooke, (F = − kx); (ii)
s energy E = K + V remains constant.
does work which only depends on the initial and
final positions, e.g. Eq. (5.17). Thus, the spring
⊳ Example 5.8 To simulate car accidents, auto
force is a conservative force.
manufacturers study the collisions of moving
We define the potential energy V(x) of the spring
cars with mounted springs of different spring
to be zero when block and spring system is in the
constants. Consider a typical simulation with
equilibrium position. For an extension (or
a car of mass 1000 kg moving with a speed
compression) x the above analysis suggests that
18.0 km/h on a smooth road and colliding
kx2 with a horizontally mounted spring of spring
V(x) = (5.19) constant 5.25 × 103 N m–1. What is the
2
You may easily verify that − dV/dx = −kx, the maximum compression of the spring ?
spring force. If the block of mass m in Fig. 5.7 is
extended to x and released from rest, then its Answer At maximum compression the kinetic
m
total mechanical energy at any arbitrary point x, energy of the car is converted entirely into the
where x lies between – x and + x will be given by potential energy of the spring.
m m,
The kinetic energy of the moving car is
1 1 1
2 k x m 2 = 2 k x2+ 2 m v2 K = 1 mv2
2
where we have invoked the conservation of
mechanical energy. This suggests that the speed
1
and the kinetic energy will be maximum at the
= ×103×5×5
2
equilibrium position, x = 0, i.e.,
K = 1.25 × 104 J
1 1
m v2 = k x2 where we have converted 18 km h–1 to 5 m s–1 [It is
m m
2 2
useful to remember that 36 km h–1 = 10 m s–1].
where v is the maximum speed. At maximum compression x , the potential
m m
energy V of the spring is equal to the kinetic
k
or v m = m x m e co n n er s g e y rv K a t o io f n th o e f m m o e v c i h n a g n c i a c r a l f r e o n m e r t g h y e . principle of
Note that k/m has the dimensions of [T-2] and
our equation is dimensionally correct. The V = 1 k x2
kinetic energy gets converted to potential energy 2 m
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 12 ---

82 PHYSICS
= 1.25 × 104 J
We obtain
x = 2.00 m
m
We note that we have idealised the situation.
The spring is considered to be massless. The
surface has been considered to possess
negligible friction. ⊳
We conclude this section by making a few
Fig. 5.9 The forces acting on the car.
remarks on conservative forces.
(i) Information on time is absent from the above 1
∆K = K − K = 0 − m v2
discussions. In the example considered f i 2
above, we can calculate the compression, but The work done by the net force is
not the time over which the compression
1
occurs. A solution of Newton’s Second Law W = − kx2 − µm g x
2 m m
for this system is required for temporal
information. Equating we have
(ii) Not all forces are conservative. Friction, for
1 1
example, is a non-conservative force. The m v2 = k x2 + µm g x
2 2 m m
principle of conservation of energy will have
Now µmg = 0.5 × 103 × 10 = 5 × 103 N (taking
to be modified in this case. This is illustrated
g =10.0 ms-2). After rearranging the above
in Example 5.9.
equation we obtain the following quadratic
(iii) The zero of the potential energy is arbitrary.
equation in the unknown x .
It is set according to convenience. For the m
spring force we took V(x) = 0, at x = 0, i.e. the k x2 +2µm g x −m v2 =0
m m
unstretched spring had zero potential
energy. For the constant gravitational force
mg, we took V = 0 on the earth’s surface. In
a later chapter we shall see that for the force
where we take the positive square root since
due to the universal law of gravitation, the
x is positive. Putting in numerical values we
zero is best defined at an infinite distance m
obtain
from the gravitational source. However, once
x = 1.35 m
the zero of the potential energy is fixed in a m
given discussion, it must be consistently which, as expected, is less than the result in
adhered to throughout the discussion. You Example 5.8.
cannot change horses in midstream ! If the two forces on the body consist of a
conservative force F and a non-conservative
c
force F , the conservation of mechanical energy
⊳ Example 5.9 Consider Example 5.8 taking nc
the coefficient of friction, µ, to be 0.5 and formula will have to be modified. By the WE
theorem
calculate the maximum compression of the
spring. (F+ F ) ∆x = ∆K
c nc
But F ∆x = − ∆V
c
Answer In presence of friction, both the spring Hence, ∆(K + V) = F ∆x
nc
force and the frictional force act so as to oppose ∆E = F ∆x
nc
the compression of the spring as shown in where E is the total mechanical energy. Over
Fig. 5.9. the path this assumes the form
We invoke the work-energy theorem, rather E
−−−−−
E = W
f i nc
than the conservation of mechanical energy.
where W is the total work done by the
The change in kinetic energy is non-conse n r c vative forces over the path. Note that
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 13 ---

WORK, ENERGY AND POWER 83
unlike the conservative force, W depends on Our electricity bills carry the energy
nc
the particular path i to f. ⊳ consumption in units of kWh. Note that kWh is
a unit of energy and not of power.
5.10 POWER
Often it is interesting to know not only the work u Example 5.10 An elevator can carry a
done on an object, but also the rate at which maximum load of 1800 kg (elevator +
this work is done. We say a person is physically passengers) is moving up with a constant
fit if he not only climbs four floors of a building speed of 2 m s–1. The frictional force opposing
but climbs them fast. Power is defined as the the motion is 4000 N. Determine the
time rate at which work is done or energy is minimum power delivered by the motor to
transferred. the elevator in watts as well as in horse
The average power of a force is defined as the power.
ratio of the work, W, to the total time t taken
Answer The downward force on the elevator is
W
P av = F = m g + F = (1800 × 10) + 4000 = 22000 N
t f
The motor must supply enough power to balance
The instantaneous power is defined as the
this force. Hence,
limiting value of the average power as time
interval approaches zero, P = F. v = 22000 × 2 = 44000 W = 59 hp ⊳
dW 5.11 COLLISIONS
P = (5.20)
dt In physics we study motion (change in position).
The work dW done by a force F for a displacement At the same time, we try to discover physical
dr is dW = F.dr. The instantaneous power can quantities, which do not change in a physical
also be expressed as process. The laws of momentum and energy
conservation are typical examples. In this
dr
P = F. section we shall apply these laws to a commonly
dt encountered phenomena, namely collisions.
Several games such as billiards, marbles or
= F.v (5.21)
carrom involve collisions.We shall study the
where v is the instantaneous velocity when the collision of two masses in an idealised form.
force is F. Consider two masses m and m . The particle
Power, like work and energy, is a scalar m is moving with speed 1 v , th 2 e subscript ‘i’
quantity. Its dimensions are [ML2T–3]. In the SI, im 1 plying initial. We can cosid 1i er m to be at rest.
its unit is called a watt (W). The watt is 1 J s–1. No loss of generality is involved in 2 making such
The unit of power is named after James Watt, a selection. In this situation the mass m
one of the innovators of the steam engine in the collides with the stationary mass m and this 1
eighteenth century. is depicted in Fig. 5.10. 2
There is another unit of power, namely the
horse-power (hp)
1 hp = 746 W
This unit is still used to describe the output of
automobiles, motorbikes, etc.
We encounter the unit watt when we buy
electrical goods such as bulbs, heaters and
refrigerators. A 100 watt bulb which is on for 10
hours uses 1 kilowatt hour (kWh) of energy.
100 (watt) × 10 (hour) Fig. 5.10 Collision of mass m , with a stationary mass m.
1 2
= 1000 watt hour The masses m and m fly-off in different
=1 kilowatt hour (kWh) directions. W 1 e shall 2 see that there are
= 103 (W) × 3600 (s) relationships, which connect the masses, the
= 3.6 × 106 J velocities and the angles.
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 14 ---

84 PHYSICS
5.11.1 Elastic and Inelastic Collisions The loss in kinetic energy on collision is
In all collisions the total linear momentum is
1 1
conserved; the initial momentum of the system ∆K = m v2 − (m +m )v2
2 1 1i 2 1 2 f
is equal to the final momentum of the system.
One can argue this as follows. When two objects
1 1 m2
collide, the mutual impulsive forces acting over = m v2 − 1 v2 [using Eq. (5.22)]
the collision time ∆t cause a change in their 2 1 1i 2 m 1 +m 2 1i
respective momenta :
1  m 
∆p 1 = F 12 ∆t = 2 m 1 v 1 2 i  1− m + 1 m  
∆p = F ∆t 1 2
2 21
where F is the force exerted on the first particle
12 1 m m
by the second particle. F is likewise the force = 1 2 v2
21 2m +m 1i
exerted on the second particle by the first particle. 1 2
Now from Newton’s third law, F = − F . This
12 21 which is a positive quantity as expected.
implies
∆p + ∆p = 0 Consider next an elastic collision. Using the
1 2 above nomenclature with θ = θ = 0, the
The above conclusion is true even though the momentum and kinetic energ 1 y co 2 nservation
forces vary in a complex fashion during the equations are
collision time ∆t. Since the third law is true at
m v = m v + m v (5.23)
every instant, the total impulse on the first object 1 1i 1 1f 2 2f
is equal and opposite to that on the second.
m v2 =m v2 +m v2 (5.24)
On the other hand, the total kinetic energy of 1 1i 1 1f 2 2f
the system is not necessarily conserved. The
From Eqs. (5.23) and (5.24) it follows that,
impact and deformation during collision may
generate heat and sound. Part of the initial kinetic m v (v −v )=m v (v −v )
1 1i 2f 1i 1 1f 2f 1f
energy is transformed into other forms of energy.
A useful way to visualise the deformation during or, v (v −v )=v2 −v2
2f 1i 1f 1i 1f
collision is in terms of a ‘compressed spring’. If
the ‘spring’ connecting the two masses regains =(v −v )(v +v )
1i 1f 1i 1f
its original shape without loss in energy, then
the initial kinetic energy is equal to the final Hence,
∴v
2f
=v
1i
+v
1f (5.25)
kinetic energy but the kinetic energy during the
collision time ∆t is not constant. Such a collision Substituting this in Eq. (5.23), we obtain
is called an elastic collision. On the other hand (m −m )
v = 1 2 v
the deformation may not be relieved and the two 1f m +m 1i (5.26)
1 2
bodies could move together after the collision. A
2m v
collision in which the two particles move together v = 1 1i
and 2f m +m (5.27)
after the collision is called a completely inelastic 1 2
collision. The intermediate case where the Thus, the ‘unknowns’ {v , v } are obtained in
1f 2f
deformation is partly relieved and some of the terms of the ‘knowns’ {m , m , v }. Special cases
1 2 1i
initial kinetic energy is lost is more common and of our analysis are interesting.
is appropriately called an inelastic collision.
Case I : If the two masses are equal
5.11.2 Collisions in One Dimension v = 0
1f
Consider first a completely inelastic collision v = v
2f 1i
in one dimension. Then, in Fig. 5.10, The first mass comes to rest and pushes off the
θ = θ = 0 second mass with its initial speed on collision.
1 2
Case II : If one mass dominates, e.g. m > > m
m v = (m +m )v (momentum conservation) 2 1
1 1i 1 2 f v ~ − v v ~ 0
1f 1i 2f
m
v = 1 v The heavier mass is undisturbed while the
f m +m 1i (5.22) lighter mass reverses its velocity.
1 2
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 15 ---

WORK, ENERGY AND POWER 85
dimensional, where the initial velocities and the
⊳
Example 5.11 Slowing down of neutrons:
final velocities lie in a plane.
In a nuclear reactor a neutron of high
speed (typically 107 m s–1) must be slowed 5.11.3 Collisions in Two Dimensions
to 103 m s–1 so that it can have a high
Fig. 5.10 also depicts the collision of a moving
probability of interacting with isotope 235U mass m with the stationary mass m . Linear
92 1 2
momentum is conserved in such a collision.
and causing it to fission. Show that a
neutron can lose most of its kinetic energy Since momentum is a vector this implies three
in an elastic collision with a light nuclei equations for the three directions {x, y, z}.
like deuterium or carbon which has a mass Consider the plane determined by the final
of only a few times the neutron mass. The velocity directions of m and m and choose it to
1 2
material making up the light nuclei, usually be the x-y plane. The conservation of the
heavy water (D O) or graphite, is called a z-component of the linear momentum implies
2
moderator. that the entire collision is in the x-y plane. The
x- and y-component equations are
Answer The initial kinetic energy of the neutron
m v = m v cos θ + m v cos θ (5.28)
is 1 1i 1 1f 1 2 2f 2
0 = m v sin θ − m v sin θ (5.29)
K = 1 m v2 1 1f 1 2 2f 2
1i 2 1 1i One knows {m , m , v } in most situations. There
1 2 1i
are thus four unknowns {v , v , θ and θ}, and
while its final kinetic energy from Eq. (5.26) 1f 2f 1 2
only two equations. If θ =θ = 0, we regain
1 2
1 1 m −m 2 Eq. (5.23) for one dimensional collision.
K = m v2 = m  1 2  v2
1f 2 1 1f 2 1m +m  1i If, further the collision is elastic,
1 2
1 1 1
mv 2 = mv 2+ m v 2 (5.30)
The fractional kinetic energy lost is 2 1 1i 2 1 1f 2 2 2f
K m −m 2 We obtain an additional equation. That still
f = 1f =  1 2  leaves us one equation short. At least one of
1 K 1i m 1 +m 2  the four unknowns, say θ , must be made known
1
while the fractional kinetic energy gained by the for the problem to be solvable. For example, θ
1
moderating nuclei K /K is can be determined by moving a detector in an
2f 1i
angular fashion from the x to the y axis. Given
f = 1 − f (elastic collision)
2 1 {m , m , v , θ} we can determine {v , v , θ}
1 2 1i 1 1f 2f 2
4m m from Eqs. (5.28)-(5.30).
= 1 2
(
m 1 +m 2
)2
⊳Example 5.12 Consider the collision
depicted in Fig. 5.10 to be between two
One can also verify this result by substituting
billiard balls with equal masses m = m .
from Eq. (5.27). 1 2
The first ball is called the cue while the
For deuterium m = 2m and we obtain
2 1 second ball is called the target. The
f = 1/9 while f = 8/9. Almost 90% of the
1 2 billiard player wants to ‘sink’ the target
neutron’s energy is transferred to deuterium. For
ball in a corner pocket, which is at an
carbon f 1 = 71.6% and f 2 = 28.4%. In practice, angle θ = 37°. Assume that the collision is
however, this number is smaller since head-on 2
elastic and that friction and rotational
collisions are rare. ⊳ motion are not important. Obtain θ .
1
If the initial velocities and final velocities of
Answer From momentum conservation, since
both the bodies are along the same straight line,
the masses are equal
then it is called a one-dimensional collision, or
head-on collision. In the case of small spherical v =v +v
1i 1f 2f
bodies, this is possible if the direction of travel ( ) ( )
of body 1 passes through the centre of body 2 or v 1i 2= v 1f +v 2f ⋅ v 1f +v 2f
which is at rest. In general, the collision is two-
=v 2 +v 2 +2v .v
1f 2f 1f 2f
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 16 ---

86 PHYSICS
{ ( ) } The matter simplifies greatly if we consider
= v 2 +v 2 +2v v cos θ +37° (5.31)
1f 2f 1f 2f 1 spherical masses with smooth surfaces, and
assume that collision takes place only when the
Since the collision is elastic and m = m it follows
1 2 bodies touch each other. This is what happens
from conservation of kinetic energy that
in the games of marbles, carrom and billiards.
v 2 =v 2 +v 2 (5.32)
1i 1f 2f
In our everyday world, collisions take place only
when two bodies touch each other. But consider
Comparing Eqs. (5.31) and (5.32), we get
a comet coming from far distances to the sun, or
cos (θ + 37°) = 0 alpha particle coming towards a nucleus and
1
or θ + 37° = 90° going away in some direction. Here we have to
1
deal with forces involving action at a distance.
Thus, θ = 53°
1 Such an event is called scattering. The velocities
This proves the following result : when two equal and directions in which the two particles go away
masses undergo a glancing elastic collision with depend on their initial velocities as well as the
one of them at rest, after the collision, they will type of interaction between them, their masses,
move at right angles to each other. ⊳ shapes and sizes.
SUMMARY
1. The work-energy theorem states that the change in kinetic energy of a body is the work
done by the net force on the body.
K - K = W
f i net
2. A force is conservative if (i) work done by it on an object is path independent and
depends only on the end points {x, x}, or (ii) the work done by the force is zero for an
i j
arbitrary closed path taken by the object such that it returns to its initial position.
3. For a conservative force in one dimension, we may define a potential energy function V(x)
such that
( )
F ( x )= − dV x
dx
xf
V −V = ∫ F ( x ) dx
or i f
xi
4. The principle of conservation of mechanical energy states that the total mechanical
energy of a body remains constant if the only forces that act on the body are conservative.
5. The gravitational potential energy of a particle of mass m at a height x about the earth’s
surface is
V(x) = m g x
where the variation of g with height is ignored.
5. The elastic potential energy of a spring of force constant k and extension x is
V ( x ) = 1 k x2
2
7. The scalar or dot product of two vectors A and B is written as A.B and is a scalar
quantity given by :A.B = AB cos θ, where θ is the angle between A and B. It can be
positive, negative or zero depending upon the value of θ. The scalar product of two
vectors can be interpreted as the product of magnitude of one vector and component
of the other vector along the first vector. For unit vectors :
ˆi⋅ˆi= ˆj⋅ˆj= kˆ ⋅kˆ =1 and ˆi⋅ˆj=ˆj⋅kˆ = kˆ⋅ˆi=0
Scalar products obey the commutative and the distributive laws.
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 17 ---

WORK, ENERGY AND POWER 87
POINTS TO PONDER
1. The phrase ‘calculate the work done’ is incomplete. We should refer (or imply
clearly by context) to the work done by a specific force or a group of forces on a
given body over a certain displacement.
2. Work done is a scalar quantity. It can be positive or negative unlike mass and
kinetic energy which are positive scalar quantities. The work done by the friction
or viscous force on a moving body is negative.
3. For two bodies, the sum of the mutual forces exerted between them is zero from
Newton’s Third Law,
F + F = 0
12 21
But the sum of the work done by the two forces need not always cancel, i.e.
W + W ≠ 0
12 21
However, it may sometimes be true.
4. The work done by a force can be calculated sometimes even if the exact nature of
the force is not known. This is clear from Example 5.2 where the WE theorem is
used in such a situation.
5. The WE theorem is not independent of Newton’s Second Law. The WE theorem
may be viewed as a scalar form of the Second Law. The principle of conservation
of mechanical energy may be viewed as a consequence of the WE theorem for
conservative forces.
5. The WE theorem holds in all inertial frames. It can also be extended to non-
inertial frames provided we include the pseudoforces in the calculation of the
net force acting on the body under consideration.
7. The potential energy of a body subjected to a conservative force is always
undetermined upto a constant. For example, the point where the potential
energy is zero is a matter of choice. For the gravitational potential energy mgh,
the zero of the potential energy is chosen to be the ground. For the spring
potential energy kx2/2 , the zero of the potential energy is the equilibrium position
of the oscillating mass.
8. Every force encountered in mechanics does not have an associated potential
energy. For example, work done by friction over a closed path is not zero and no
potential energy can be associated with friction.
9. During a collision : (a) the total linear momentum is conserved at each instant of
the collision ; (b) the kinetic energy conservation (even if the collision is elastic)
applies after the collision is over and does not hold at every instant of the collision.
In fact the two colliding objects are deformed and may be momentarily at rest
with respect to each other.
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 18 ---

88 PHYSICS
EXERCISES
5.1 The sign of work done by a force on a body is important to understand. State carefully
if the following quantities are positive or negative:
(a) work done by a man in lifting a bucket out of a well by means of a rope tied to the
bucket.
(b) work done by gravitational force in the above case,
(c) work done by friction on a body
sliding down an inclined plane,
(d) work done by an applied force on
a body moving on a rough
horizontal plane with uniform
velocity,
(e) work done by the resistive force of
air on a vibrating pendulum in
bringing it to rest.
5.2 A body of mass 2 kg initially at rest
moves under the action of an applied
horizontal force of 7 N on a table with
coefficient of kinetic friction = 0.1.
Compute the
(a) work done by the applied force in
10 s,
(b) work done by friction in 10 s,
(c) work done by the net force on the
body in 10 s,
(d) change in kinetic energy of the
body in 10 s,
and interpret your results.
5.3 Given in Fig. 5.11 are examples of some
potential energy functions in one
dimension. The total energy of the
particle is indicated by a cross on the
ordinate axis. In each case, specify the
regions, if any, in which the particle
cannot be found for the given energy.
Also, indicate the minimum total
energy the particle must have in each
case. Think of simple physical contexts
for which these potential energy shapes
are relevant.
Fig. 5.11
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 19 ---

WORK, ENERGY AND POWER 89
5.4 The potential energy function for a
particle executing linear simple
harmonic motion is given by V(x) =
kx2/2, where k is the force constant
of the oscillator. For k = 0.5 N m-1,
the graph of V(x) versus x is shown
in Fig. 5.12. Show that a particle of
total energy 1 J moving under this
Fig. 5.12
potential must ‘turn back’ when it
reaches x = ± 2 m.
5.5 Answer the following :
(a) The casing of a rocket in flight
burns up due to friction. At
whose expense is the heat
energy required for burning
obtained? The rocket or the
atmosphere?
(b) Comets move around the sun
in highly elliptical orbits. The
gravitational force on the
comet due to the sun is not Fig. 5.13
normal to the comet’s velocity
in general. Yet the work done by the gravitational force over every complete orbit
of the comet is zero. Why ?
(c) An artificial satellite orbiting the earth in very thin atmosphere loses its energy
gradually due to dissipation against atmospheric resistance, however small. Why
then does its speed increase progressively as it comes closer and closer to the earth ?
(d) In Fig. 5.13(i) the man walks 2 m carrying a mass of 15 kg on his hands. In Fig.
5.13(ii), he walks the same distance pulling the rope behind him. The rope goes
over a pulley, and a mass of 15 kg hangs at its other end. In which case is the work
done greater ?
5.6 Underline the correct alternative :
(a) When a conservative force does positive work on a body, the potential energy of
the body increases/decreases/remains unaltered.
(b) Work done by a body against friction always results in a loss of its kinetic/potential
energy.
(c) The rate of change of total momentum of a many-particle system is proportional
to the external force/sum of the internal forces on the system.
(d) In an inelastic collision of two bodies, the quantities which do not change after
the collision are the total kinetic energy/total linear momentum/total energy of
the system of two bodies.
5.7 State if each of the following statements is true or false. Give reasons for your answer.
(a) In an elastic collision of two bodies, the momentum and energy of each body is
conserved.
(b) Total energy of a system is always conserved, no matter what internal and external
forces on the body are present.
(c) Work done in the motion of a body over a closed loop is zero for every force in
nature.
(d) In an inelastic collision, the final kinetic energy is always less than the initial
kinetic energy of the system.
5.8 Answer carefully, with reasons :
(a) In an elastic collision of two billiard balls, is the total kinetic energy conserved
during the short time of collision of the balls (i.e. when they are in contact) ?
(b) Is the total linear momentum conserved during the short time of an elastic collision
of two balls ?
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 20 ---

90 PHYSICS
(c) What are the answers to (a) and (b) for an inelastic collision ?
(d) If the potential energy of two billiard balls depends only on the separation distance
between their centres, is the collision elastic or inelastic ? (Note, we are talking
here of potential energy corresponding to the force during collision, not gravitational
potential energy).
5.9 A body is initially at rest. It undergoes one-dimensional motion with constant
acceleration. The power delivered to it at time t is proportional to
(i) t1/2 (ii) t (iii) t3/2 (iv) t2
5.10 A body is moving unidirectionally under the influence of a source of constant power.
Its displacement in time tis proportional to
(i) t1/2 (ii) t (iii) t3/2 (iv) t2
5.11 A body constrained to move along the z-axis of a coordinate system is subject to a
constant force F given by
F = −ˆi+2 ˆj+3 kˆ N
where ˆi, ˆj, kˆ are unit vectors along the x-, y- and z-axis of the system respectively.
What is the work done by this force in moving the body a distance of 4 m along the
z-axis ?
5.12 An electron and a proton are detected in a cosmic ray experiment, the first with kinetic
energy 10 keV, and the second with 100 keV. Which is faster, the electron or the
proton ? Obtain the ratio of their speeds. (electron mass = 9.11×10-31 kg, proton mass
= 1.67×10–27 kg, 1 eV = 1.60 ×10–19 J).
5.13 A rain drop of radius 2 mm falls from a height of 500 m above the ground. It falls with
decreasing acceleration (due to viscous resistance of the air) until at half its original
height, it attains its maximum (terminal) speed, and moves with uniform speed
thereafter. What is the work done by the gravitational force on the drop in the first
and second half of its journey ? What is the work done by the resistive force in the
entire journey if its speed on reaching the ground is 10 m s–1 ?
5.14 A molecule in a gas container hits a horizontal wall with speed 200 m s–1 and angle 30°
with the normal, and rebounds with the same speed. Is momentum conserved in the
collision ? Is the collision elastic or inelastic ?
5.15 A pump on the ground floor of a building can pump up water to fill a tank of volume 30 m3
in 15 min. If the tank is 40 m above the ground, and the efficiency of the pump is 30%,
how much electric power is consumed by the pump ?
5.16 Two identical ball bearings in contact with each other and resting on a frictionless
table are hit head-on by another ball bearing of the same mass moving initially with a
speed V. If the collision is elastic, which of the following (Fig. 5.14) is a possible result
after collision ?
Fig. 5.14
Reprint 2025-26

--- Page 21 ---

WORK, ENERGY AND POWER 91
5.17 The bob A of a pendulum released from 30o to the
vertical hits another bob B of the same mass at rest
on a table as shown in Fig. 5.15. How high does
the bob A rise after the collision? Neglect the size of
the bobs and assume the collision to be elastic.
5.18 The bob of a pendulum is released from a horizontal
position. If the length of the pendulum is 1.5 m,
what is the speed with which the bob arrives at the
lowermost point, given that it dissipated 5% of its
initial energy against air resistance ?
5.19 A trolley of mass 300 kg carrying a sandbag of 25 kg
is moving uniformly with a speed of 27 km/h on a Fig. 5.15
frictionless track. After a while, sand starts leaking
out of a hole on the floor of the trolley at the rate of
0.05 kg s–1. What is the speed of the trolley after the entire sand bag is empty ?
5.20 A body of mass 0.5 kg travels in a straight line with velocity v =a x3/2 where a = 5 m–1/2 s–1.
What is the work done by the net force during its displacement from x = 0 to
x = 2 m ?
5.21 The blades of a windmill sweep out a circle of area A. (a) If the wind flows at a
velocity v perpendicular to the circle, what is the mass of the air passing through it
in time t ? (b) What is the kinetic energy of the air ? (c) Assume that the windmill
converts 25% of the wind’s energy into electrical energy, and that A = 30 m2, v = 36
km/h and the density of air is 1.2 kg m–3. What is the electrical power produced ?
5.22 A person trying to lose weight (dieter) lifts a 10 kg mass, one thousand times, to a
height of 0.5 m each time. Assume that the potential energy lost each time she
lowers the mass is dissipated. (a) How much work does she do against the gravitational
force ? (b) Fat supplies 3.8 × 107J of energy per kilogram which is converted to
mechanical energy with a 20% efficiency rate. How much fat will the dieter use up?
5.23 A family uses 8 kW of power. (a) Direct solar energy is incident on the horizontal
surface at an average rate of 200 W per square meter. If 20% of this energy can be
converted to useful electrical energy, how large an area is needed to supply 8 kW?
(b) Compare this area to that of the roof of a typical house.
Reprint 2025-26